Ethics and Policy Issues in Computing (Spring 2025) 
17-200/18-384/19-211 
Lecture Time: Tuesdays and Thursdays 2:00-3:20 PM ET 
Recitation Time: Fridays 11AM (Section A) & 12PM (Section B) in Baker Hall Rm A36 
Location:  
In-person: Gates 4307 
➢​ We do not record class to respect student privacy due to the sensitive nature of 
discussions involving ethics and personal values. 
Professors: 
Michael Skirpan  
●​ Email: mskirpan@cmu.edu 
●​ Web: https://mwskirpan.com 
●​ Office hours 
○​ By appointment 
○​ Mike tends to work in his office (TCS Hall Rm. 314) Tues/Thurs 9A-1P for 
drop-ins or as a good time to schedule with him. 
Jim Herbsleb 
●​ Email:jdh@cs.cmu.edu  
●​ Web: https://herbsleb.org  
●​ Office hours 
○​ By appointment, please send an email to find a good time. 
Teaching Assistants (TAs):  
➢​ Aditi Narasimhan (aditin@andrew.cmu.edu)  
➢​ Kennedy Botts (kbotts@andrew.cmu.edu)  
➢​ Khinezin Win (kwin@andrew.cmu.edu)  
➢​ Rachel Wilson (rbwilson@andrew.cmu.edu) 
➢​ Sameeksha Garg (sameeksg@andrew.cmu.edu) 
➢​ Sophia Holland (sophiaho@andrew.cmu.edu) 
➢​ Tatym Rasmussen (tatymr@andrew.cmu.edu) 
➢​ Nicholas Mesa-Cucalon (nmesacuc@andrew.cmu.edu)  
➢​ William Montague (wmontagu@andrew.cmu.edu) 
1 

 
➢​ Sathwika Manda (sathwikm@andrew.cmu.edu) 
★​ Note about TA-Student Assignments: All students will be assigned a “lead TA” who is 
their point of contact for questions about grading, course content, and to schedule your 
1:1 sessions with (see below). If for some reason you do not feel good about your 
relationship with your lead TA, you can reach out to Profs. Skirpan and Herbsleb to 
discuss and be re-assigned. 
Grading:  
●​ Major Assignments (35%) 
○​ Across 3 assignments 
●​ Written Exam (15%) 
●​ Class Engagement (20%) 
○​ 10% Attendance 
○​ 10% Participation 
●​ Weekly Assignments (15%) 
●​ Final Group Presentations (15%) 
Course Requirements 
Class Engagement (20% of grade): Class engagement points are broken up into 3 
components outlined below: 
1.​ Attendance (10%) - Class attendance will be taken at each lecture and recitation. Each 
lecture and recitation is worth a point. Students are granted 4 grace days meaning 
you can miss up to 4 days with no penalty (ie., we drop 4 points of the total before 
calculating your grade at the end of semester). These can be used to handle illness or 
occasional travel. If you are experiencing extended illness or some other type of 
emergency situation, please reach out to Profs. Skirpan and Herbsleb for attendance 
accommodation. Outside of these extenuating circumstances, any absence will use a 
grace day (ie., a sick day is what a grace day is for)   
a.​ We do have a grace window for late arrivals without prior approval: for class, 
being more than 30 mins late, counts as an absence, and for recitation 
being more than 15 minutes late counts as an absence 
b.​ TA Kennedy Botts will be in charge of synthesizing and posting attendance 
grades week to week and should be treated as the point of contact for questions 
about attendance. (All other grading questions should go to your lead TA) 
2.​ Discussion participation (10%) – throughout class time, there will be prompted 
discussion and chances for discourse with your instructors and fellow students. The 
entire class will also be asked to participate in small group discussions or solo exercises, 
and to share perspectives from their small groups or private work with the rest of the 
class. TAs will be tracking who engaged in public discussion and share-outs through 
contributing ideas and arguments, sharing insights from activities, and asking content 
relevant questions (ie., “when is the assignment due?” does not count). Our benchmark 
2 

 
is to reach 8 significant contributions to class discussion throughout the semester for an 
A grade in this area. 
3.​ Weekly Assignments (15%) 
a.​ Each week we will give a short homework assignment that asks you to reflect on 
readings, and perform short writing exercises that synthesize material from the 
course. The assignments will change from week to week, but will be centered 
around the weekly lecture content, readings, and recitations. 
b.​ In addition to the weekly written assignments, students must perform (and will 
receive points for) 2 required 1:1 check-ins with TAs throughout the 
semester. These sessions will be to discuss your course progress and to get 
fine-grain feedback on your writing and how to improve. Scheduling and 
attending these sessions will be cumulatively tracked as part of your assignment 
grade. One check-in should be scheduled for the week prior to the midterm, and 
one should be scheduled the weeks leading up to the final. 
c.​ Students are each given 2 “late passes” for weekly assignments. Assignments 
are generally due on Sunday nights. 2 times per semester, you can tell your 
lead TA that you need to use a late pass (must be communicated before the 
assignment due date) which gives you a 4 day extension for submission. 
Major Assignments (30% of grade): Throughout the course, there will be three major written 
assignments that are each worth 10% of your final grade. The assignments directly relate to the 
key skills and content the course seeks to cover, please see each assignment write-up on 
Canvas. 
The 3 major assignments are as follows: 
1.​ Perspectives on Personal Values (due 2/13)  
a.​ This assignment asks you to reflect on your personal values and how they relate 
to your behaviors and to technology. We will also ask that you interview someone 
outside your major to discuss your values and compare perspectives on what the 
value terminology means to different people. 
b.​ Learning objective: Be able to articulate your personal ethics and translate them 
into the practical context of technology and professional life. 
2.​ Position Paper (due 3/27) 
a.​ This assignment asks you to take a position on an ethical question related to 
technology and engineering. You should give an overview of the ethical problem 
you are focusing on, including defining key terminology, you will then have to 
make clear what side you take on the issue, and give an exposition of your 
perspective using real examples, speculations, and counter-arguments to 
potential critiques.  
b.​ Learning objective: Be able to develop a strong ethical stance on an issue by 
framing an issue clearly and arguing for a specific position leveraging awareness 
of other stakeholder perspectives and positions.  
3.​ Ethics Scenario/Story (due 4/17) 
3 

 
a.​ This assignment asks you to write either a fictional short story or do a 
presentation of a scenario that represents a real ethical dilemma faced by 
practitioners in industry. The goal is to ensure you can develop and discuss how 
specific scenarios of risks and harms that happen when people use technology 
are structured by ethical dilemmas the technologists face when making design / 
implementation decisions. 
b.​ Learning objective: Communicating the material consequences of tech ethics 
issues to a broader public. 
Written Exam (20% of grade): The Midterm will be held in person on Thursday, March 20th 
during classtime. You will have the full class time (1 hour and 20 mins) to complete the exam. It 
will cover topics from class in a variety of formats including defining terms, performing analysis 
using concepts and frameworks, and writing structured positions (and counter-arguments) for 
given prompts. 
Final Presentation (15% of final grade): The final presentation will involve you working with a 
group (2-4 people) to develop a short verbal presentation and corresponding visual aid to 
explain a topic of interest relevant to the course (e.g., AI and Medical Malpractice). We will have 
a class showcase time where students will have an opportunity to set up their visuals and 
present to our TAs and members of the public who the instructional team will invite. During the 
presentation time, “graders” will go around and stop at each team’s station to get a short 
presentation and overview and ask questions. Groups will be graded based on clarity of 
presentation, accessibility to the general public, and team communication dynamics. There will 
be a short report that is submitted along with the presentation that summarizes your research, 
key cases and arguments, and explains what the public should know and do about the issue. 
●​ We are waiting to coordinate when the poster session will be and will announce it to the 
class (and put on Canvas) as soon as we have it confirmed. 
Course Structure 
Please be aware that this course uses Canvas and you should be regularly checking Canvas for 
the most up to date information on the class. 
Lecture Time  
Class is held in person, attendance is taken each day, and our lecture time does involve critical 
points of student engagement. This is a discussion heavy class so expect to be called on and 
prepared to talk during class.  
Each lecture will involve moderated discussion with the support of our TAs and occasionally 
course guests. Every single lecture will contain points of open dialogue, analysis, and Q&A with 
4 

 
students. We will be tracking student participation in the class dialogue which will contribute to 
your grade. 
There will be lecture slides that distill core content, definitions, references, and examples. 
However, most classes will open with questions and/or cases that motivate this content. We will 
use slides and content to illuminate and deepen discussion, and in most cases we will return to 
dialogue or other forms of active learning to further digest content. 
The use of laptops during discussion is strongly discouraged as there is ample evidence this 
harms learning [1, 2]. However, we will have a debate on the first day of class to determine the 
final policy. Regardless, lecture slides will be made available on Canvas although hand-written 
notes are encouraged to help with retention.  
Recitation Session 
Weekly recitations will be places for key dialogue across peers, discussing arguments and 
positions on key issues, and practicing core writing and communication skills. These sessions 
will be led by our TAs with an occasional guest moderator. Most of the session will take place in 
breakout groups that are having conversation in smaller units. 
Recitations are counted for attendance and your weekly homework assignment will include a 
reflection section that will build off the discussion prompts from recitation. 
Course Objectives 
This course is expected to introduce students to ethical thinking and writing as it relates to 
technology and engineering. We will take a very applied approach to teaching ethics where our 
goals will be more about supporting each student in adopting practical and reproducible mental 
habits that  allow you to go about your specialized work with an ethical lens or mindset. We will 
also reinforce writing and communication skills such that each student is better prepared to both 
speak and write about ethical concepts and frameworks in their discussion of technology and 
engineering. The learning outcomes you can expect are: 
1.​ Increased communication skills in writing and speaking about ethics in the technology 
and engineering context 
2.​ An improved awareness of current events related to technology ethics issues and 
science and technology policy 
3.​ An improved awareness of differing perspectives around different ethical dilemmas and 
issues 
4.​ Translational skills for converting ethical concepts into engineering examples, choices, 
and practices, and vice versa. 
5 

 
5.​ Ability to reason through and creatively interpret engineering problems and scenarios 
using ethical frameworks and concepts 
6.​ Develop your own personal ethical standards around how you approach computing 
issues within your future career.  
Laptop Policy 
(to be updated and finalized after class debate on day 1) 
Laptops and devices should only be used for course-relevant note-taking and research 
purposes during class time. The expected etiquette is that you will close or tilt down your 
laptop screen when you are not actively taking notes or doing research so the screen is not 
visible to yourself or others around you. 
If you do use your laptop for longer periods, the professor or TAs will be walking through the 
class. If it is found you are using your laptop for uses unrelated to class, you will lose your 
attendance point for the day. If it happens multiple times, we will call you in for a meeting and 
may dock further points from your overall participation grade if a respectful behavior can not be 
followed. 
If this policy fails to create a culture of listening and engaging with one another during 
discussion, we reserve the right to move toward a full laptop ban during any active discussion. 
On Tolerance and Respect 
In this course students will be expected to engage in discussion about ethics, which is a 
notoriously thorny and personal matter. Taking this course implies you are interested in 
improving your comprehension and awareness of ethical issues in computing. Part of 
developing a viewpoint and set of ethics is understanding the landscape of thought. In order to 
tread this together and learn from one another, we must listen to each other and fundamentally 
give one another respect and the benefit of the doubt.  
It is anticipated that cultural viewpoints are going to be bound into how we each interpret this 
material and so we expect that people will practice the art of careful listening. Students who feel 
certain discussions may be challenging for them to hold in a group setting are welcome to join 
the TAs in office hours as a replacement to group discussion. For particularly personal topics, 
we are also open to scheduling separate small-group or individual discussions to offer a safe 
space to work out your ideas. 
DEI Statement 
We must treat every individual with respect. We are diverse in many ways, and this diversity 
is fundamental to building and maintaining an equitable and inclusive campus community. 
Diversity can refer to multiple ways that we identify ourselves, including but not limited to race, 
color, national origin, language, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, 
6 

 
creed, ancestry, belief, veteran status, or genetic information. Each of these diverse identities, 
along with many others not mentioned here, shape the perspectives our students, faculty, and 
staff bring to our campus. We, at CMU, will work to promote diversity, equity and inclusion not 
only because diversity fuels excellence and innovation, but because we want to pursue justice. 
We acknowledge our imperfections while we also fully commit to the work, inside and outside of 
our classrooms, of building and sustaining a campus community that increasingly embraces 
these core values. 
Each of us is responsible for creating a safer, more inclusive environment. 
Unfortunately, incidents of bias or discrimination do occur, whether intentional or unintentional. 
They contribute to creating an unwelcoming environment for individuals and groups at the 
university. Therefore, the university encourages anyone who experiences or observes unfair or 
hostile treatment on the basis of identity to speak out for justice and support, within the moment 
of the incident or after the incident has passed. Anyone can share these experiences using the 
following resources: 
●​ Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion: csdi@andrew.cmu.edu, (412) 268-2150 
●​ Report-It (Links to an external site.) online anonymous reporting platform: 
reportit.net (Links to an external site.) username: tartans password: plaid 
All reports will be documented and deliberated to determine if there should be any following 
actions. Regardless of incident type, the university will use all shared experiences to transform 
our campus climate to be more equitable and just.