1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-320 – Microelectronic Circuits 
Spring 2025 
 
 
Instructor: Prof. Marc Dandin 
 
 
Office Location: HH 2111 
Email Address: mdandin@andrew.cmu.edu    
Office Hours: TBA  
 
Teaching Assistants: TBA 
Email Addresses: TBA 
 
Office Hours:  TBA 
 
 
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html
Course Description:  
18-320 introduces students to the fundamentals of microelectronic circuits. The course will emphasize the analysis 
and design of basic analog and digital integrated circuits in preparation for further study in analog, digital, mixed-
signal, and radio-frequency integrated circuit design. Additionally, students will learn to design and analyze 
microelectronic circuits using industry standard computer aided design (CAD) software. Topics to be covered 
include: MOSFET fabrication and layout MOSFET models for analog and digital design Analysis and design of 
digital CMOS logic gates Analysis and design of clocked storage elements (e.g., flip-flops, latches, memory cells) 
Delay optimization of digital circuits Circuit topologies for arithmetic and logical functional units Analysis and 
design of single-stage MOS amplifiers Frequency response characteristics of single-stage amplifiers Differential 
amplifiers and simple operational amplifiers Analog filters using operational amplifiers The course includes a lab 
component which will give students hands-on experience in the design and implementation of analog and digital 
circuits. Labs will employ both design using discrete, SSI, and MSI parts, as well as using CAD design tools. 
 
Class Schedule:  
 
• Lecture: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 12:30 pm – 1:50 pm, TEP 3500 
• Labs: Tuesdays (Section B), Wednesdays (Section C), and Thursdays (Section A), 07:00 pm –  09:50 
pm, HH A101 
• Recitation: Fridays, 11:00 am – 11:50 pm, HHB103 
 

 
2 
 
Number of Units: 12 
Pre-requisite: 18-220  
Co-requisite: 18-240 
Class Mode: In-Person Expectation  
 
Textbooks:  
 
• Sedra & Smith (SS), “Microelectronics Circuits,” 7th ed., Oxford University Press 
• Weste & Harris (WH), “CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and Systems Perspective,” 4th ed., Addison-
Wesley, 2011 
 
Other References:  
 
• 
Mayergoyz & Lawson, ““Basic Electric Circuit Theory, Academic Press, 1997 
• 
Baker, “CMOS: Circuit Design, Layout, and Simulation”,  4th ed., Wiley 
 
Computing Resources:  
You should remote log-in to one of the headless ece000~ece031 servers. Note that you will need a VPN client to 
access our campus resources remotely. 
 
Course Canvas:  
Canvas login page: https://canvas.cmu.edu/. You should check the course Canvas daily for announcements and 
handouts.  
 
Grading Algorithm:  
 
Homework (9-10) =   10%  
Labs (8)  = 25%  
Exams (3)   = 60%  
Final Report (1) =    5%  
 
The following maximum grade cutoffs are guaranteed:  
 
 > 92 A  
 > 83 B  
 > 72 C  
 > 61 D  
 
General Course Policies: 
 
• Collaboration on homework and labs is permitted but a submission must reflect your own individual 
effort. 
• This class has an explicit late policy included in each assignment. Generally, individual assignments 
will reflect two due dates, the first, which is the date by which the assignment is due, and the second, 
which is the last possible date the assignment will be accepted with no penalty. After the second date, the 
assignment will not be accepted. Students are encouraged to reach out to the course instructor should any 
unforeseen and later documentable events preclude a timely submission.  
 

 
3 
 
Educational Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education.  ABET defines 7 Educational 
Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the courses you take.  The following list describes which 
objectives are fulfilled by this course and in what manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from 
“1” through “7” in the standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by 18-320 have been omitted from 
the following list: 
 
1. An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of 
engineering, science, and mathematics. For example, you will learn how physical device characteristics 
give rise to design trade-offs, and you will learn how to mitigate these design trade-offs by applying 
engineering and scientific principles grounded in mathematical reasoning. 
 
2. An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with consideration 
of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic 
factors. For example, in the latter part of the course, we will discuss the current state of microelectronics 
research, and we will discuss how circuits are deployed in health and environmental applications.  
 
 
3. An ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences. In this class, you will produce a final 
report covering a microelectronics problem. Throughout the course, you will learn how to effectively 
present your lab findings in a written format.  
 
4. An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make 
informed judgments, which must consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, 
environmental, and societal contexts. In the latter part of the course, we will discuss the ethical and 
professional implications of microelectronics research.  
 
 
5. An ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a 
collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives. For instance, 
you will work in a group to conduct labs and projects. 
 
6. An ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and use 
engineering judgment to draw conclusions. The labs will give you hands-on experience in experimenting 
with several aspects of mixed-signal circuit design.  
 
 
7. An ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies. In this 
class, you will learn how to learn! Projects and homework will include metacognitive components that 
will force you to audit your own learning and refine your methods of absorbing new material. 
 
ECE