1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-819D: Special Topics in Applied Physics: Memory Devices and 
Technology 
 
Fall 2024 
 
Instructor: 
 
Xu Zhang 
Office Location: 
REH 231 
Email Address: 
xuzh@cmu.edu 
Office Hour:   
Tuesday, 4-5 pm 
 
Course Management Assistant at the Academic Service Center 
Email Address: ece-asc@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Location: HH 1112 
 
 
Course Description:  
This course examines the fundamental principles of semiconductor memory devices, 
including volatile and non-volatile solid state random access memory (RAM) systems. 
Both commercially deployed memory technology (Dynamic RAM, Static RAM, Flash, 
etc) will be examined along with emerging technologies (like Magnetic RAM, Resistive 
RAM). Cell physics will be examined using physical models of device switching, including 
heat flow, magnetic field induced switching, capacitance and tunneling. The advanced 
applications of memory or memory-like devices in the emerging field of neuromorphic 
computing will also be introduced. Through the course, the students will become familiar 
with major memory device structures and integration technology. By completing the 
course, the students will establish a good understanding about a variety of memory devices 
and analysis techniques, as well as developing a strong knowledge base about emerging 
memory technologies and how they are applied in neuromorphic computing and AI.  
 
Number of Units:  
12 
 
Pre-requisites:  
Basic semiconductor device physics will be useful, but not required. 
 
Co-requisite:  
None 
 
Graduate Course Area: Device Science and Nanofabrication 

 
2 
 
 
Class Schedule: 
• Lecture:  
Monday and Wednesday 
12:00pm – 1:20pm 
 
 
GHC 4211 
 
Required Textbook: None 
 
Recommended Reading:  
- 
Integrated Microelectronic Devices: Physics and Modeling, 1st Edition, by Jesus del 
Alamo, 2017, Pearson 
- 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition, by Simon M. Sze, Kwok K. Ng 
- 
Devices, Circuits, and Systems: Nanoscale Semiconductor Memories: Technology and 
Applications. by Kurinec, Santosh K, 2013  
- 
NAND Flash Memory Technologies, by Seiichi Aritome, 2015, John Wiley & Sons  
- 
Nonvolatile Memory Technologies with Emphasis on Flash: A Comprehensive Guide 
to Understanding and Using Flash Memory Devices, Joe Brewer (Editor), Manzur Gill 
(Editor) ISBN: 978-1-118-21162-5, 2011, Wiley-IEEE Press 
 
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
This graduate course introduces students to the fundamental device physics, advanced 
integration technology and cutting-edge innovations in memory device and technology 
innovations. Upon completion of this course, students will be able to do the following: 
 
1. Understand the basic device physics of semiconductor memory devices and 
technology including flash memory, SRAM, DRAM, phase change memory, STT-
MRAM, resistance random access memory, ferroelectric memory. 
2. Demonstrate a familiarity with major memory device structures and integration 
technology. 
3. Demonstrate a familiarity with basic memory system architecture and peripheral 
circuits. 
4. Apply device models to analyze various types of memory devices and circuits. 
5. Establish knowledge base about the emerging advance memory technologies and 
applications in new computing architectures. 
 
Course Canvas:  
To access the course Canvas, go to the login page at: https://cmu.instructure.com/. You 
should check the course Canvas daily for announcements and handouts.  
 
Grading Algorithm:  
 
5% 
Participation 
25 % 
Homework 
20% 
MidTerm 
10 % 
Project Presentation 

 
3 
 
40 % 
Final 
 
Assignment Submission Policy 
 
Homework 
The students are expected to complete the assignments independently. Minimum amount 
of discussion is allowed among students provided that the discussion partner is disclosed 
in the submission. The discussion and collaboration should be limited to only the current 
18-819D students and the TA. Discussion and consultation with people outside the class 
or finding answers on the web or elsewhere etc. are not permitted. 
 
Class Project and Presentations 
Class project will consist of the case study of an existing or emerging memory device 
technology in terms of its design principles, fabrication and integration technology, and 
unique applications in memory and computing. The study will include both qualitative and 
quantitative analysis of the device technology and performance advantages. The study will 
be presented in the class. The presentation will be 15 minutes plus 5 min Q&A. Project 
grading will be based on the oral presentations. 
 
Additional Policies 
Late assignment submission will not be accepted with the exception of only emergency 
reasons established and approved by the university. Late submissions or submissions that 
violate the rules above will have deductions at the discretion of the instructor and the 
TA/Grader. 
 
Tentative Course Calendar: 
 
Date 
Day 
Class Activity 
August  
26 
M 
Introduction and memory technology trend 
28 
W 
Semiconductors and carrier statistics 
September 
2 
M 
NO CLASS  
4 
W 
MOSFET operation I   
9 
M 
MOSFET operation II   
11 
W 
Floating gate memory  
16 
M 
Microprocessor and memory system basics 
18 
W 
NAND Flash memory technology 
23 
M 
NAND Flash memory technology  
25 
W 
3D Flash memory 

 
4 
 
30 
M 
SRAM cells and operation 
October 
2 
W 
SRAM operation and design considerations 
7 
M 
Midterm Exam  
9 
W 
DRAM cells and operation 
14 
M 
NO CLASS 
16 
W 
NO CLASS 
21 
M 
RRAM devices and operation principles 
23 
W 
RRAM crossbar architectures and selection devices 
28 
M 
Phase change memory device and technology 
30 
W 
STT-MRAM technology 
November 
4 
M 
Ferroelectric RAM 
6 
W 
3D chip integration: logic, memory and functional circuits 
11 
M 
Neuromorphic computing and In-memory computing I  
13 
W 
Neuromorphic computing and In-memory computing II 
18 
M 
Quantum memory 
20 
W 
Student presentations 
25 
M 
Student presentations 
27 
W 
NO CLASS 
December 
2 
M 
Final Exam  
 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes): 
 
(1) an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics: Computation of 
MOSFET models; Computation of memory cell physics involving capacitance, quantum 
mechanical tunneling current, heat flow, magnetic fields; Computation of circuit level 
memory access events. 
 
(2)  an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified 
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, 
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors: Lecture material and homework 
assignments covers assessment of cost of memory based on cost of capital investment. 

 
5 
 
The development of next generation data storage system and techniques for future 
electronic systems will be discussed.  
  
(3)  an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences: Students will do 
project presentations as part of this course requirements.   
  
(4)  an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering 
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of 
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts: The 
impact of data processing and storage etc. on the global community is discussed 
throughout the semester. 
 
(5)  an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan 
tasks, and meet objectives: Students will be engaged in interactive discussion during 
lectures and project presentations. Students can form a group to do the project 
presentation.  
 
(6)  an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions: Homework 
assignments are cast at a level sufficiently abstract that some degree of problem 
formulation must be undertaken before a solution may be pursued. Final numerical 
answers are sought in the assignments and exams. In some cases, a rigorous format of 
homework presentation must be followed, according to best practice presentation of 
quantitative analysis. 
 
(7)  an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies: Emphasis on estimation exercises teaches a skill that initial insights 
into new domains can be drawn from existing knowledge. This lowers the barrier to 
further exploration and instills a culture of curiosity. 
 
Resources for Stress Management 
 
Take care of yourself. Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating 
well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time 
to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress. 
 
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are 
many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college 
experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is 
often helpful. 
 
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or 
feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. 
Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) is here to help: call 412-268-2922 and 
visit their website at http://www.cmu.edu/counseling/. Consider reaching out to a friend, 

 
6 
 
faculty or family member you trust for help getting connected to the support that can 
help. 
 
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call someone 
immediately, day or night: 
 
CaPS: 412-268-2922 
 
Re:solve Crisis Network: 888-796-8226 
 
If the situation is life threatening, call the police: 
On campus: CMU Police: 412-268-2323 
Off campus: 911 
 
If you have questions about this or your coursework, please let me know. 
 
ECE