1 
                                                                                                                       
Course Syllabus 
18-898: Special Topics in Signal Processing: Graph Signal Processing and 
Geometric Learning 
Fall 2024 
August 25, 2024 
 
 
Course Instructor:  
Prof. José M. F. Moura  
PH B15  
moura@ece.cmu.edu  
            Office Hours: anytime, by appointment 
 
Teaching Assistants: 
Siddarth Ambekar 
sambekar@andrew.cmu.edu  
Office Hours: Fridays 3-4pm, for additional times send an email. 
 
Soham Deshmukh 
sdeshmuk@andrew.cmu.edu  
Office Hours: Tuesdays (time to be determined), for additional times send an 
email. 
 
 
 
Class Schedule:  
Lectures: Mondays, 2:00pm-4:50pm, MI 355 
 
Course Description:  
Number of Units: 12 
Pre-requisites: Prior exposure to Linear Algebra and or Linear Signal Processing 
is advisable 
Graduate Breadth Area: Signal Processing and Communications 
 
Required Textbook:  
None. Course notes available from instructor. 
 
Brief Contents: 
This course will present Graph Signal Processing (GSP), a novel data analytics perspective 
to deal with data supported by graphs. Such data occurs in many application domains from 
traditional physics-based signals like time series, images, or video to data traveling on 

 
2 
 
telecom networks, to gene networks, chemical networks, or arising in social networks, 
marketing, corporate, financial, health care domains.  
 
It introduces graphs, graph representations, and basic concepts of Network Science, 
including graph representations through adjacency and graph Laplacian matrices, graph 
random models, graph spectral analysis, and degree distributions. Then, it covers Graph 
Signal Processing (GSP) that extends traditional Digital Signal Processing methods to data 
supported by graphs, introducing graph shift, graph shift invariance, graph signals, graph 
filtering, graph Fourier transform, graph convolution, graph frequency and graph spectral 
analysis of graph signals, sampling of graph signals, interpolation, graph modulation and 
multiplexing, among other concepts. The course then covers the consensus algorithm and 
basics of distributed signal processing, and it studies diffusion in networks, taking as basic 
example the spread of epidemics in populations. Finally, the course considers Geometric 
Learning combining GSP and Deep Learning (DL), in particular, graph neural networks 
(GNN).  
 
We review in more detail the course by summarizing the contents of the course notes. 
 
Chapter 1 introduces signals as data of different types indexed by generic structures, 
namely, by the nodes of arbitrary graphs. Chapter 2 focus on basic notation and concepts 
that are useful in describing and characterizing graphs and their properties, illustrating 
these with concrete examples of well-known graphs. The chapter introduces basics of 
enumerations on graphs and finally considers matrix graph representations like the 
adjacency matrix and the graph Laplacian.  
 
Chapters 3 and 4 are a brief introduction to Network Science concepts. Chapter 3 considers 
metrics and quantities that can succinctly summarize expected behaviors of a network like 
how easy it is to diffuse a meme or news (including fake news) through the network, or to 
spread epidemics. Chapter 4 studies standard deterministic and random network models.  
 
Chapters 5 through 9 cover Graph Signal Processing (GSP). Chapter 5 briefly reviews 
Digital Signal Processing (DSP), but by capturing DSP in a matrix-vector format. Chapter 
6 considers the generic GSP model where the graph signal is given by its vertex samples, 
i.e., by the signal values  at each node of the graph. Chapter 7 considers GSP but when the 
graph signal is given by the coefficients of its graph Fourier representation rather than by 
its vertex samples. Chapter 8 extends chapters 6 and 7 to various graph signal 
representations, serving as background to chapter 9 that studies sampling of graph signals. 
 
Chapter 10 presents the consensus algorithm, the basic ingredient for distributed signal 
processing, and Chapter 11 considers diffusion in networks by studying a simple epidemics 
model describing virus spread in a population. 
 
Appendix A summarizes background on Matrices, by reviewing basic concepts of matrix 
spectral analysis (eigenvalues and eigenvectors) and geometry of vector spaces (inner 
products), and Appendix B reviews concepts on combinatorial sums and enumeration. 
 

 
3 
 
Since the notes do not as yet include a chapter on Learning, like CNNs, nor on Geometric 
Learning, like graph neural networks (GNN), we will refer the students to standard 
references.  
 
Time permitting, we will consider several additional topics.  
 
Students will apply in a project methods presented in class to synthetic datasets and/ or 
real-world datasets of their choosing.  
 
Course Canvas:  
To access the course canvas go to the canvas login page at: https://canvas.cmu.edu.  
 
Piazza:  
https://canvas.cmu.edu/courses/35830/external_tools/11046  
 
Homework:  
Homeworks will be handed out weekly or biweekly, depending on the topic. Homeworks 
are to be uploaded to Gradescope by 11:59am Pittsburgh time by the day the homework is 
due. The Gradescope student guide is in https://www.cmu.edu/teaching/gradescope/ . 
 
Homework late policy:  
Every student is given 4 late days for the semester. You can use one late day to extend the 
deadline of the HW by 24 hours. You can only use maximum 2 late days/homework 
(extending any HW deadline by maximum of 48 hours). You can distribute them however 
you like (i.e., 1 late day each for 4 hws, 2 late days each for 2 hws). Any late HW without 
late days or submitted after 48 hours will not receive credit.  
 
Course Project:  
There will be a class project. Students are encouraged to work their project in a small group 
(two students). Student groups should be formed by October 7 – please let the TIs know 
who your group is. A one-page project abstract is to be submitted by October 28. The 
project should apply what is learned in the course to an application of interest and explore 
the concepts covered in broader contexts. The project report should be equivalent to a 4-
page conference paper (double column written in latex) and should be submitted no later 
than Thursday December 5. There will be an oral presentation (15 to 20 min per group, 
including Q&A) to the class on Friday December 6 (last day of classes). Students are 
expected to attend the presentations of all groups and interact with the speaker. 
 
Exam:  
There is a midterm exam at a date and time to be determined (sometime in November). 
There is no final exam.  
 
Lecture attendance class participation:  
We encourage student participation and engagement in Lectures. We take attendance of 
lectures. At the end of the semester, we will arbitrarily choose 10 of the lectures. A student 
will get a point for each of these lectures attended to a maximum of eight points. 
 

 
4 
 
How do we take attendance? A form will be given, along with a unique number each 
lecture. Students will have 10 minutes (from when we give the number) to submit the form 
to get credit for attendance.  
 
Grading:  
The midterm counts for 20% of the grade. Class attendance counts for 8%. The project 
counts for 36%. The homework counts for the remaining 36%.  
 
Letter grades will be derived from the numerical score that results. Initial thresholds are: 
A for score greater than or equal to 88; B for grade greater than or equal to 75 and less than 
88. Grade C for score greater than or equal to 60 and less than 75. Grade D for score greater 
than or equal to 50 and less than 60. Failing grade F for score less than 50. 
 
ECE