1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-095: Getting Started in Electronics: An Experiential Approach 
Spring 2025
 
Instructor:    
Tom Zajdel   
Office Location:   
HH A210 
Email Address:   
tzajdel@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
TAs: 
Sharia Farhan, Moises Gavarrete, Jieun Lim, Cole MacSwain, Meera 
Pandya, Shaye Xu 
 
 
Course Web Page:   
We will use the Canvas system for our Web Page this semester. You should attempt to 
access the page as soon as possible to ensure that you have access to the course materials. 
http://www.cmu.edu/canvas/  
 
Course Information: 
Number of Units:  
9 
Anti-requisite: 
18-100 
 
Course Description:  
Building circuits as a hobby has been a reliable introduction to a career in engineering for 
many decades, providing essential context and motivation for the mathematics and analysis 
techniques developed in the canonical ECE curriculum. 
For those with little prior knowledge of electronics, building circuits provides useful context 
and practical skills that lead to success in the rigorous engineering core. For those pursuing 
other career paths, exploring electronics develops technical literacy that will supplement and 
enhance their pursuits.  
Nowadays, the growth of maker culture has provided a wealth of tools that make electronics 
more accessible than ever before. This class uses an experiential learning approach to 
develop skills in circuit design, prototyping, and debugging. Every lecture is integrated with 
a hands-on laboratory experiment, punctuating each lesson with physical inquiry. Principles 
of analog circuits, digital circuits, microcontrollers, and measurement equipment will be 
explored one experiment at a time, through twice-weekly integrated lecture/circuit builds 
and once-weekly self-guided builds. Additionally, three projects with a gradual increase in 
complexity and open-endedness will build student skills in electronic system design. 

 
2 
 
The goal of this course is to build self-efficacy for basic prototyping and circuit building 
skills. By the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Build and prototype electronic circuits  
a. Build circuits based on a schematic diagram on a solderless breadboard 
b. Solder components to printed circuit boards 
2. Use electrical measurement tools to debug circuit operation: 
a. Measure voltage, current, resistance, and electrical continuity with a digital 
multimeter 
b. Detect wiring errors 
3. Interface a microcontroller with electrical inputs and outputs. 
a. Use digital and analog inputs to measure and process data from sensors 
b. Use digital and analog outputs to control actuators 
4. Design and prototype a useful electronic system, from idea to implementation 
5. Use periodic self-reflection to understand their personal growth in electronics 
6. Document electronics designs to communicate them to others  
 
These concepts will be explored one circuit at a time, with an emphasis on experimentation. 
 
For this class, I am conducting research on student attitudes and learning. This research 
will involve completing some surveys. You will not be asked to do anything above and 
beyond the normal learning activities and assignments that are part of this course. You are 
free not to participate in this research, and your participation will have no influence on your 
grade for this course or your academic career at CMU. If you do not wish to participate or if 
you are under 18 years of age, please send an email to Chad Hershock 
(hershock@andrew.cmu.edu), and then your data will not be included. Participants will not 
receive any compensation. The data collected as part of this research will not include student 
grades. All analyses of data from participants’ coursework will be conducted after the 
course is over and final grades are submitted. The Eberly Center may provide support on 
this research project regarding data analysis and interpretation. The Eberly Center for 
Teaching Excellence & Educational Innovation is located on the CMU-Pittsburgh Campus 
and its mission is to support the professional development of all CMU instructors regarding 
teaching and learning. To minimize the risk of breach of confidentiality, the Eberly Center 
will never have access to data from this course containing your personal identifiers. All data 
will be analyzed in de-identified form and presented in the aggregate, without any personal 
identifiers. If you have questions pertaining to your rights as a research participant, or to 
report concerns to this study, please contact Chad Hershock (hershock@andrew.cmu.edu). 
 
Reference Textbook: 
 
There is no required textbook. Reference notes and some reference video recordings will be 
supplied when applicable. The course will be loosely based on the experiential learning 
classic Getting Started in Electronics by Forrest Mims III, which has launched many 
engineering careers since its release in 1983. 
 
Lab Materials:  
Students will receive all materials needed for all the labs. Handouts for Lab will be posted on 
Mondays. 

 
3 
 
 
Course Meeting Info: 
 
Sessions:             Mondays and Wednesdays 
11:00am-12:20pm 
HHA104 
      
 
 
 
 
OR 
2:00pm-3:20pm 
HHA104 
Sessions are an essential part of this course because they introduce the topics of the 
week and feature hands-on experiences. You are expected to bring your lab kits to these 
sessions. Digital notes will be provided before each session. 
 
Open Lab Hours:  
      Wed and Thu 
4:00pm-7:00pm 
HHA104 
 
 
   
  
 
  
Fri 
11:30am-4:00pm 
HHA104 
 
Most weeks have a laboratory assignment, which will require students to build and 
demonstrate one to three circuits, each demonstrating fundamental principles of 
electronics. They are designed to be completed over about three hours during open lab 
hours, which will be staffed by TAs. Students may attend whichever times work within 
their schedule, and are encouraged to start on their lab assignments early. Hours are 
subject to change or expand based on TA availability. Additional hours are available 
upon request. 
 
Grading Policy:  
There are a total of 1000 points available in the course (with some extra credit 
opportunities). Your grade will be calculated using the following method: 
60%  Labs 
30% 
Project 
  5% 
Lab Practical 
  5% 
Reflections 
 
While lower cutoffs may be used, the following cutoffs are guaranteed: 
>=90 A 
>=80 B 
>=70 C 
>=60 D 
 
 
 

 
4 
 
Assignments: 
 
Reflections (50 points): 
 
An important part of developing technical skills is periodic self-reflection. A survey will 
be administered at three points throughout the semester as a chance to reflect on the 
experiences in the course and organize students’ thoughts about what they are learning. 
1. Reflection 1 (15 points) due January 24 at 11:59 pm. 
2. Reflection 2 (15 points) due March 14 at 11:59 pm. 
3. Reflection 3 (20 points) due April 25 at 11:59 pm. 
 
Labs (600 points): 
 
Each lab section will feature 1-3 circuits that must be built and successfully 
demonstrated during Open Lab Hours before the end of the lab week. Electrical 
measurements of these circuits are recorded in the lab manual as part of the checkoff. 
Full lab credit for the week will be assigned if all circuits and measurements have been 
successfully completed and the lab document is submitted on Gradescope. Lab 
documents are due on Fridays at 5 pm. 
Lab 1: Soldering (75 points) 
Lab 2: Breadboards and Resistive Sensors (75 points) 
Lab 3: Decision-Making Circuits (75 points) 
Lab 4: Digital Logic (75 points) 
Lab 5: Digital I/O (75 points) 
Lab 6: Analog I/O (75 points) 
Lab 7: Serial Communication (75 points) 
Lab 8: 555 Timer (75 points) 
 
Project (300 points): 
 
Students will be prompted to use a microcontroller to design an interactive system that 
improves (interpreted broadly) the experience of being inside Hamerschlag Hall. The 
project will be done in pairs assigned by the instructors (or a group of 3 if required). A 
proposal process will be used to keep projects manageable, and a Consult (meeting with 
a TA) and Progress Check (follow-up meeting with TA) will help students set and meet 
project milestones. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposal 
25 points 
Wednesday, Feb 26 
Consult 
25 points 
Wednesday, Mar 12 
Progress Check 
25 points 
Wednesday, Apr 2 
Showcase Day 
150 points 
Friday, Apr 11 
Documentation 
75 points 
Wednesday, Apr 23 

 
5 
 
 
Lab Practical (50 points) 
 
There will be a 30-minute practical laboratory exam on April 21, with a specific time 
slot during class to be scheduled in advance. This exam will have students use an 
electrical schematic and digital multimeter to accomplish the following: 
o to build a circuit based on a schematic 
o to debug and fix an non-operational circuit on a breadboard 
 
 
Lab Makeup Policy:  
 
Each of the lab circuits for the week should be completed by 5pm on Friday for full credit. 
Any lab checkoffs that could not be completed on time can be completed up to one 
week late for full credit. Lab check-offs completed beyond this time limit are worth 70%. 
Written lab questions may also be submitted up to one week late for full credit, but will not 
be accepted for any credit beyond one week late. 
 
Attendance: 
Because the hands-on experience is so critical for this course, attendance is expected at all 
lecture and lab sections. If you need to miss a lab session, please give advance notice so a 
lecture recording can be arranged. 
 
Any in person meeting associated with the class, whether group or individual, requires 
compliance with the University’s guidelines, i.e. “Tartan’s Responsibility”: 
https://www.cmu.edu/coronavirus/students/tartans-responsibility.html 
 
 
 

 
6 
 
Date 
Day 
Session 
Lab Assignment 
Jan 
13 
M 
S1: Quantifying Electricity 
Lab 1: Soldering 
Due Friday, Jan 17 at 5pm 
Jan 
15 
W 
S2: Breadboards and Ohm’s Law 
Jan 
20 
M 
MLK Jr. DAY 
Lab 2: Breadboards and Resistive 
Sensors 
Due Friday, Jan 24 at 5pm 
 
Reflection 1 
Due Friday, Jan 24 at 11:59pm 
Jan 
22 
W 
S3: Voltage Dividers and Resistive Sensors 
Jan 
27 
M 
S4: Comparators 
Lab 3: Decision-Making Circuits 
Due Friday, Jan 31 at 5pm 
Jan 
29 
W 
S5: Transistors and Motors 
Feb 
3 
M 
S6: Digital Logic Gates and Arithmetic Circuits 
Lab 4: Digital Logic 
Due Friday, Feb 7 at 5pm 
Feb 
5 
W 
S7: Binary and Shift Registers 
Feb 
10 
M 
S8: Microcontrollers and Digital I/O  
Lab 5: Digital I/O 
Due Friday, Feb 14 at 5pm 
Feb 
12 
W 
S9: Project Pitches 
Feb 
17 
M 
S10: NeoPixels  
Lab 6: Serial Communication 
Due Friday, Feb 21 at 5pm 
Feb 
19 
W 
S11: Liquid Crystal Displays and I2C 
Feb 
24 
M 
S12: Analog to Digital Conversion and PWM 
Lab 7: Analog I/O and Motors 
Due Friday, Feb 28 at 5pm  
Feb 
26 
W 
S13: Servo Motors 
Project Proposal Due 5pm 
Spring Break (March 3-7) 
Mar 
10 
M 
S14: Laser Cutter Training 
Work on Projects 
 
Reflection 2 
Due Friday, Mar 14 at 11:59 pm 
Mar 
12 
W 
S15: Work Time 
Consult Report Due 5pm 
Mar 
17 
M 
S16: Work Time 
Work on Projects 
Mar 
19 
W 
S17: Work Time 
Mar 
24 
M 
S18: Work Time 
Work on Projects 
Mar 
26 
W 
S19: Work Time 
Mar 
31 
M 
S20: Work Time/Progress Check 
NO LAB 
(SPRING CARNIVAL) 
Apr 
2 
W 
S21: Work Time/Progress Check 
Progress Check Due 5pm 

 
7