1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-095: Getting Started in Electronics: An Experiential Approach 
Fall 2024
 
Instructor:    
Tom Zajdel   
Office Location:   
HH A210 
Email Address:   
tzajdel@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:   
TBD – See Canvas 
 
Instructor:   
Ziad Youssfi 
Office Location:  
HH A202 
Email Address:  
zyoussfi@andrew.cmu.edu  
 
 
Office Hours:  
TBD – See Canvas 
 
TAs: 
Rosina Ananth, Carolyn Alex, Sharia Farhan, Moises Gavarrete, Cole 
MacSwain, Meera Pandya, Shaye Xu 
 
 
Course Web Page:   
We will use the Canvas system for our Web Page this semester. You should attempt to 
access the page as soon as possible to ensure that you have access to the course materials. 
http://www.cmu.edu/canvas/  
 
Course Information: 
Number of Units:  
9 
Anti-requisite: 
18-100 
 
Course Description:  
Building circuits as a hobby has been a reliable introduction to a career in engineering for 
many decades, providing essential context and motivation for the mathematics and analysis 
techniques developed in the canonical ECE curriculum. 
For those with little prior knowledge of electronics, building circuits provides useful context 
and practical skills that lead to success in the rigorous engineering core. For those pursuing 
other career paths, exploring electronics develops technical literacy that will supplement and 
enhance their pursuits.  
Nowadays, the growth of maker culture has provided a wealth of tools that make electronics 
more accessible than ever before. This class uses an experiential learning approach to 

 
2 
 
develop skills in circuit design, prototyping, and debugging. Every lecture is integrated with 
a hands-on laboratory experiment, punctuating each lesson with physical inquiry. Principles 
of analog circuits, digital circuits, microcontrollers, and measurement equipment will be 
explored one experiment at a time, through twice-weekly integrated lecture/circuit builds 
and once-weekly self-guided builds. Additionally, three projects with a gradual increase in 
complexity and open-endedness will build student skills in electronic system design. 
The goal of this course is to build self-efficacy for basic prototyping and circuit building 
skills. By the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Build and prototype electronic circuits  
a. Build circuits based on a schematic diagram on a solderless breadboard 
b. Solder components to printed circuit boards 
2. Use electrical measurement tools to debug circuit operation: 
a. Measure voltage, current, resistance, and electrical continuity with a digital 
multimeter 
b. Detect wiring errors 
3. Interface a microcontroller with electrical inputs and outputs. 
a. Use digital and analog inputs to measure and process data from sensors 
b. Use digital and analog outputs to control actuators 
4. Design and prototype a useful electronic system, from idea to implementation 
5. Use periodic self-reflection to understand their personal growth in electronics 
 
These concepts will be explored one circuit at a time, with an emphasis on experimentation. 
 
For this class, I am conducting research on student attitudes and learning. This research 
will involve completing some surveys. You will not be asked to do anything above and 
beyond the normal learning activities and assignments that are part of this course. You are 
free not to participate in this research, and your participation will have no influence on your 
grade for this course or your academic career at CMU. If you do not wish to participate or if 
you are under 18 years of age, please send an email to Chad Hershock 
(hershock@andrew.cmu.edu), and then your data will not be included. Participants will not 
receive any compensation. The data collected as part of this research will not include student 
grades. All analyses of data from participants’ coursework will be conducted after the 
course is over and final grades are submitted. The Eberly Center may provide support on 
this research project regarding data analysis and interpretation. The Eberly Center for 
Teaching Excellence & Educational Innovation is located on the CMU-Pittsburgh Campus 
and its mission is to support the professional development of all CMU instructors regarding 
teaching and learning. To minimize the risk of breach of confidentiality, the Eberly Center 
will never have access to data from this course containing your personal identifiers. All data 
will be analyzed in de-identified form and presented in the aggregate, without any personal 
identifiers. If you have questions pertaining to your rights as a research participant, or to 
report concerns to this study, please contact Chad Hershock (hershock@andrew.cmu.edu). 
 

 
3 
 
Reference Textbook: 
 
There is no required textbook. Reference notes and some reference video recordings will be 
supplied when applicable. The course will be loosely based on the experiential learning 
classic Getting Started in Electronics by Forrest Mims III, which has launched many 
engineering careers since its release in 1983. 
 
Lab Materials:  
Students will receive all materials needed for all the labs. Handouts for Lab will be posted on 
Mondays. 
 
Course Meeting Info: 
 
Sessions:             Mondays and Wednesdays 
11:00am-12:20pm 
HHA104 
      
 
 
 
 
OR 
2:00pm-3:20pm 
HHA104 
Sessions are an essential part of this course because they introduce the topics of the 
week and feature hands-on experiences. You are expected to bring your lab kits to these 
sessions. Digital notes will be provided before each session. 
 
Open Lab Hours:  
      Wed and Thu 
4:00pm-7:00pm 
HHA104 
 
 
   
  
 
  
Fri 
11:30am-4:00pm 
HHA104 
 
Most weeks have a laboratory assignment, which will require students to build and 
demonstrate one to three circuits, each demonstrating important principles of electronics. 
They are designed to be completed over about three hours during open lab hours, which 
will be staffed by TAs. Students may attend whichever times work within their schedule, 
and are encouraged to start on their lab assignments early. Hours are subject to change 
or expand based on TA availability. Additional hours are available upon request. 
 
Grading Policy:  
There are a total of 1000 points available in the course (with some extra credit 
opportunities). Your grade will be calculated using the following method: 
50%  Labs 
40% 
Projects 
  5% 
Lab Practical 
  5% 
Reflections 
 
While lower cutoffs may be used, the following cutoffs are guaranteed: 
>=90 A 
>=80 B 
>=70 C 
>=60 D 
 
Assignments: 

 
4 
 
 
Reflections (5%): 
 
An important part of developing technical skills is periodic self-reflection. A survey will 
be administered at three points throughout the semester as a chance to reflect on the 
experiences in the course and organize students’ thoughts about what they are learning. 
1. Reflection 1 (15 points) due September 4 at 11:59 pm. 
2. Reflection 2 (15 points) due November 1 11:59 pm. 
3. Reflection 3 (20 points) due Finals Week, time TBD 
 
Labs (500 points): 
 
Each lab section will feature 1-3 circuits that must be built and successfully 
demonstrated during Open Lab Hours before the end of the lab week. Electrical 
measurements of these circuits are recorded in the lab manual as part of the checkoff. 
Full lab credit for the week will be assigned if all circuits and measurements have been 
successfully completed and the lab document is submitted on Gradescope. Lab 
documents are due on Fridays at 5 pm. 
1. Lab 1: Soldering (60 points) 
2. Lab 2: Breadboards and Resistive Sensors (60 points) 
3. Lab 3: Decision-Making Circuits (60 points) 
4. Lab 4: Digital I/O (60 points) 
5. Lab 5: Analog I/O (60 points) 
6. Lab 6: Digital Logic (60 points) 
7. Lab 7: Serial Communication (70 points) 
8. Lab 8: 555 Timer (60 points) 
 
Projects (400 points): 
 
There are two projects that will be completed over the course of the semester. The 
Projects are: 
1. Hamerschlag Hall Improvement (150 points) 
2. Final Hack (250 points) 
 
 
Project 1: Hamerschlag Hall Improvement (150 points) 
 
Students will be prompted to use a microcontroller to design an interactive system 
that improves the experience of navigating Hamerschlag Hall. The project will be 
done in pairs assigned by the instructors (or a group of 3 if required). A proposal 
process will be used to keep projects manageable, and a Consult (meeting with a 
TA) will help students set and meet project milestones. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposal 
25 points 
Monday, Sep 30 
Consult Report 
25 points 
Wednesday, Oct 9 
Showcase Day 
100 points 
Wednesday, Oct 30 

 
5 
 
Project 2: Final Hack 
 
The “Final Hack” is an open-ended design project that comprises 25% of the course 
grade. This final project invites students to use their own creativity to produce an 
entirely new system, showcased during Finals Week. Students may complete this 
project in groups of two or individually. Groups of two may be selected by students. 
 
The design process will be scaffolded throughout the semester with a number of 
checkpoints to give students feedback and keep them on track with the process. The 
checkpoints are as follows: 
 
Proposal 
50 points 
Wednesday, Nov 6 
Consult Report 
50 points 
Wednesday, Nov 13 
Showcase Day 
150 points 
TBD (Finals) 
 
Lab Practical (50 points) 
 
There will be a 20-minute practical laboratory exam on November 24, with a specific 
time slot during class to be scheduled in advance. This exam will have students use an 
electrical schematic and digital multimeter to accomplish the following: 
o to build a circuit based on a schematic 
o to debug and fix an non-operational circuit on a breadboard 
 
 
Lab Makeup Policy:  
 
Each of the lab circuits for the week should be completed by the end of the lab session to 
keep up with the course material. If a student cannot complete the lab circuits in the allotted 
time, they may demonstrate the remaining circuits at the start of the next week’s lab session 
for full credit. Any lab checkoffs that could not be completed on time can be completed later 
for 70% credit. Late lab writeups will be limited to 70% credit. 
 
Attendance: 
Because the hands-on experience is so critical for this course, attendance is expected at all 
lecture and lab sections. If you need to miss a lab session, please give advance notice so a 
lecture recording can be arranged. 
 
Any in person meeting associated with the class, whether group or individual, requires 
compliance with the University’s guidelines, i.e. “Tartan’s Responsibility”: 
https://www.cmu.edu/coronavirus/students/tartans-responsibility.html 
 
 
 

 
6 
 
Date 
Day 
Session 
Lab Assignment 
Aug 
26 
M 
S1: Quantifying Electricity 
Lab 1: Soldering 
Due Friday, Aug 30 at 5pm 
Aug 
28 
W 
S2: Breadboards and Ohm’s Law 
Sep 
2 
M 
LABOR DAY 
Reflection 1 
 
Lab 2: Breadboards and 
Resistive Sensors 
Due Friday, Sep 6 at 5pm 
Sep 
4 
W 
S3: Voltage Dividers and Resistive Sensors 
Sep 
9 
M 
S4: Comparators 
Lab 3: Decision-Making 
Circuits 
Due Friday, Sep 13 at 5pm 
Sep 
11 
W 
S5: Transistors and Motors 
Sep 
16 
M 
S6: Introduction to Microcontrollers, Digital I/O 
Lab 4: Digital I/O 
Due Friday, Sep 20 at 5pm 
Sep 
18 
W 
S7: Hamerschlag Hall Improvement Tour 
Sep 
23 
M 
S8: Analog to Digital Conversion 
Lab 5: Analog I/O 
Due Friday, Sep 27 at 5pm 
Sep 
25 
W 
S9: Pulse-Width Modulation 
Sep 
30 
M 
S10: Serial Communication and LCDs  
Project 2 Proposal 
Due Mon, Sep 30 at 11:59pm 
 
Lab 6: Serial Communication 
Due Friday, Oct 2 at 5pm 
Oct 
2 
W 
S11: NeoPixels 
Oct 
7 
M 
S12: Digital Logic Gates and Arithmetic 
Circuits 
Project 2 Consult Report 
Due Wed, Oct 9 at 11:59pm 
Oct 
9 
W 
S13: Work Time 
Fall Break (Oct 14-18) 
Oct 
21 
M 
S14: Work Time 
 
Project 2 Work Time 
 
Lab 7: Digital Logic 
Due Friday, Oct 23 at 5pm 
Oct 
23 
W 
S15: Work Time 
Oct 
28 
M 
S16: Work Time 
Remove HH Demos 
 
Reflection 2 
Due Fri, Nov 1 at 11:59pm 
Oct 
30 
W 
S17: Hamerschlag Hall Improvement Showcase 
Project 2 Due (in class) 
Nov 
4 
M 
S18: Final Hack Pitches 
Final Hack Proposal 
Due Wed, Nov 6 at 11:59pm 
Nov 
6 
W 
S19: Proposal Work and Research Time 
Nov 
11 
M 
S20: Capacitors 
Final Hack Consult Report 
Due Wed, Nov 13 at 11:59pm 

 
7