1 
Course Syllabus 
18-100: Introduction to Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Spring 2025 
Instructor:
Greg Kesden 
Office Location:
HH A205 
Email Address:
gkesden@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/~gkesden/schedule.html 
Instructor:
Mark Budnik 
Office Location:
HH A212 
Email Address:
mbudnik@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:
Monday, 2-4pm or by appointment 
Teaching Assistants: 
Course Web Page: 
We will use the Canvas system for our Web Page this semester. You should attempt to 
access the page as soon as possible to ensure that you have access to the course materials. 
http://www.cmu.edu/canvas/ 
Students are responsible for any information conveyed via announcements made in 
lecture and/or on the course web page. Absence from class the day of an important 
announcement does not excuse you from being responsible for that information. 
Akshaj Sharma Catherine Li 
Haowen Huang 
Kamya Singh 
Shirley Li 
Angela Wu 
Clair Zhou 
Henry Kim 
Kevin Qian 
Shravani Vedagiri 
Angie Shere 
Daniel Lin 
Irene Fidone 
Luna Lee 
Sylvia Lyu 
Ankita Kundu 
David Chan 
Jasmine Li 
Miguel Salvacion Tiffany Yang 
Ashley Yuan 
Deniz Balci 
JiWon Jin 
Ming Yue 
Victor Li 
Berin Celik 
Dilan Leon 
John Diaz 
Mohid Rattu 
Wes Lee Lee 
Caleb Song 
Eric Ma 
Jonathan Waller 
Om Patel 
Yuvvan Talreja 
Calla Song 
Felipe Perotti Julius Arolovich 
  

2 
 
Course Information: 
Number of Units: 
12 
Co-requisite: 
21-120 (you can take before or while taking 18-100) 
Course Designation: 
18-100 is a required course for ECE majors 
Undergraduate Course Area: 
ECE Core 
 
Course Description: 
The goals of this introductory engineering course are: 
● To introduce a broad spectrum of electrical and computer engineering sub-disciplines 
in an integrated manner; 
● To communicate the foundational abstractions underlying electrical and computer 
engineering as a discipline; 
● To motivate basic concepts in the context of real applications; 
● To illustrate the process of thinking about problems and creating solutions; 
● To inspire students for embracing future challenges, and; 
● To prepare students by building the basic understanding and enthusiasm for higher 
level classes in all areas of electrical and computer engineering, such as the next-tier 
core courses 18-213, 18-220, 18-240, and 18-290. 
The coverage of the course lectures and labs specifically includes: basic electric and 
electronic circuits, computer digital logic, registers, memories, and CPUs, computer system 
architecture, embedded systems, CMOS technology, LED technology, filters, amplifiers, 
digital-analog conversion, wireless/wired digital communication, computer networks, 
cryptography and cyber security, data storage technology and data centers, and machine 
learning. 
 
Students are introduced to the above topics not only through lectures, but also through 
hands-on experience of constructing, testing and analyzing a series of carefully designed 
small electronic and software “ECE systems” labs. Specifically, these labs cover: 
Lab 1: Circuits – Electrical measurements; LEDs 
Lab 2: Adder – Gate-level digital logic; binary adder circuits 
Lab 3: MOSFET – Transistor-level logic; latching circuits 
Lab 4: Signals – Timing circuits and signal generation 
Lab 5: Op Amp – Operational amplifier circuits; oscilloscopes and signal generators 
Lab 6: Serial – I2C serial communication 
Lab 7: ADC – Frequency response of passive filters, sample-and-hold circuits  
Lab 8: Radio – Amplitude modulation; wireless communication circuits 
Lab 9: Crypto and Cloud – Cryptography and IoT Cloud Integration  

3 
 
The above labs are matched with the lecture series to consolidate the comprehension of the 
course material through practical hands-on and thought-provoking experiences. Along with 
the lecture materials, these labs should strengthen the fundamentals demanded by the next 
tier courses on analog devices and circuits (18-220), digital logic and computation (18-240), 
signal analysis and processing (18-290) and computer systems (18-213). 
 
In addition, an effort is included in this course to help familiarize all students with some of 
the specialized vocabulary that is often employed in the field of ECE. An additional goal of 
this course is for students to establish qualitative intuition about how electrical and 
computer systems operate in preparation for detailed quantitative analysis to be developed 
later in the ECE core. 
 
Reference Textbook: 
There is no reference text. Lecture notes will be provided. 
 
Lab Materials: 
Students will receive all materials needed for all the labs. Handouts for Lab will be posted on 
the course canvas website one week prior to their due date. 
Two of the devices, ADALM 2000 and a Raspberry Pi Pico in the lab materials that you will 
receive, require the use of a personal computer, either Mac or PC, with at least two USB-A 
ports. We will use them starting in Lab 4. 
 
Course Meeting Info: 
 
Lectures:  
Mondays and Wednesdays 
12:30pm-1:50pm 
HOA 160 
Lectures are a critical part of this course. We do not have a textbook that is closely 
followed in this course. Therefore, your timely comprehension on any given topic are 
extremely important. Lecture slides and notes will be posted the day before each lecture 
on Canvas. They will remain available on Canvas throughout the semester. 
 
Recitations and Small Groups: 
 
 
 
Small groups, listed on the University schedule as the Sunday afternoon or Monday evening 
meetings are mandatory and graded. You must attend the small group at the time and location 
for which you are registered.  Small group meetings involve groups of five (5) students 
facilitated by two (2) TAs, and focus on hands-on learning and skill-building.  
 
Lab Kits 
 
Each student will receive a lab kit containing all the components, materials, and test 
equipment necessary to complete all of the labs. Lab equipment will be distributed 
during the first week of classes, and lab exercises are designed to be completed 
anywhere (at home, TechSpark, etc.). 

4 
 
 
Course Activities: 
 
To help students assess how well they are understanding the material presented in class, 
there are a number of course activities that provide feedback on progress. 
 
Exams: 
 
The course lectures are broadly divided into three sections. At the end of each section, 
there will be an Exam covering primarily the material presented in that section. There 
will not be a cumulative final exam in this course although materials from previous 
section(s) may still appear on a given exam due to natural dependencies. The first two 
exams are during regular lecture time slots. The third exam is during the final exams 
period.  
 
All exams are to be taken during the scheduled exam date and time. Make-up exams are 
highly discouraged. If you are unable to take an exam at the scheduled time (for a valid 
reason), you must contact one of the instructors preferably one week prior to the 
originally scheduled. Make-up exams may or may not be possible, but some reasonable 
accommodation will be made.  
If you have special circumstances approved by the Disabled Student Services office, 
please make arrangements with the instructors at least 72 hours before the scheduled 
exam time. 
Quizzes: 
A multiple-choice style quiz will be given at the end of each lecture using the quiz 
platform on Canvas. Each quiz usually consists of three problems and these quiz 
problems serve the purpose of reviewing the lecture material just presented. Students 
need to finish each quiz by 10 pm the next day and no extensions will be granted for 
quiz due dates. 
 
Homework: 
Doing homework assignments is the best way to reinforce understanding of the material 
being covered in class. Homework will be submitted via Gradescope. You will upload a 
scan (pdf) or photo (jpg) of your solution to each problem.  
 
You may work together on mastering an understanding of each of the homework 
problems; that is, learning how to set up the equations that embody the homework 
problem and learning how to solve them. However, the actual written solutions to the 
problems that you upload to Gradescope must reflect your own understanding. 
You should NOT submit someone else’s solutions. You should NOT just copy someone 
else’s solutions and submit them. Furthermore, artificial intelligence text generators such 
as ChatGPT should not be used to directly produce answers to questions on assignments. 
These actions constitute cheating and will be reported to the