1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-100: Introduction to Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Fall 2024 
 
Instructor:   
 
Jian-Gang (Jimmy) Zhu 
Office Location:  
 
REH 348 
Email Address:  
 
jzhu@cmu.edu 
 
 
 
Office Hours:  
 
Tuesdays:    1:30 pm-4:00 pm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lead Teaching Assistants:  
Liam Carden and Kaitlyn Vitkin 
                                                            lcarden@andrew.cmu.edu, kvitkin@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
ECE Course Office Location:  
HH 1113 (a.k.a. the ECE Course Hub) 
 
 
Course Web Page:   
We will use the Canvas system for our Web Page this semester. You should attempt to 
access the page as soon as possible to ensure that you have access to the course materials. 
http://www.cmu.edu/canvas/  
 
Students are responsible for any information conveyed via announcements made in 
lecture and/or on the course web page. Absence from class the day of an important 
announcement does not excuse you from being responsible for that information. 
 
 
Course Information: 
Number of Units:  
 
 
12 
Co-requisite:  
 
 
21-120 (you can take before or while taking 18-100) 
Course Designation:   
 
18-100 is a required course for ECE major 
Undergraduate Course Area:  
ECE Core 
 
 
Course Description:  
This course introduces basic concepts and principles over the broad spectrum of electrical 
and computer engineering in an integrated manner. It covers basic concepts in electronic 
circuits, computer logic circuits, computer architecture, analog and digital signals 

 
2 
 
processing, wired and wireless communication systems, computer network, computer 
memory, data storage, and data center technologies, machine learning and artificial 
intelligence, and cryptography and data security. The 9 specially designed labs in the course 
give students excellent hands-on experience on various examples of practical systems in 
electrical and computer engineering. The labs also help to consolidate the understanding of 
the topics covered in lectures. The course is designed to inspire and motivate students 
through in-depth learning of many present systems and their underlying fundamentals.   
 
Specifically, the labs in this course: 
Lab 1:  Circuits Lab – Electrical measurements; LEDs  
Lab 2:  MOSFET Lab – Transistor-level logic; flip-flop circuits 
Lab 3: Adder Lab – Gate-level digital logic; binary adder circuits  
Lab 4: 555 Lab – Time and frequency signal generation  
Lab 5: Op-Amp Lab – Amplifier circuits using operational amplifier 
Lab 6:  ADC Lab – Analog to digital conversion.  
  
Lab 7:  Radio Lab – Amplitude modulation; frequency selections circuits; antennas. 
Lab 8:  Serial Lab - I2C communication protocol; real-time clocks 
Lab 9:  Crypto Lab – Crypto schemes via wireless communications. 
 
The above labs are well matched with the lecture series to consolidate the comprehension of 
the course material through practical hands-on and thought-provoking experiences. Along 
with the lecture materials, these labs should strengthen the fundamentals demanded by the 
next tier courses on analog devices and circuits (18-220), digital logic and computation (18-
240), signal analysis and processing (18-290) and computer systems (15-213). 
 
In addition, an effort is included in this course to help familiarize all students with some of 
the specialized vocabulary that is often employed in the field of ECE. An additional goal of 
this course is for students to establish qualitative intuition about how electrical and 
computer systems operate in preparation for detailed quantitative analysis to be developed 
later in the ECE core. 
 
 
 
Reference Textbook:  
Not required. 
 
Lab Materials:  
Students will receive all materials needed for all the labs. Handouts for Lab will be posted on 
the course canvas website prior to your Lab session.  
Two of the devices, ADALM 2000 and Arduino MKR Zero in the lab materials that you will 
receive, require the use of a personal computer, either Mac or PC, with at least two USB 
connections. We will use them starting in Lab 4.  

 
3 
 
 
Course Meeting Info: 
 
Lectures:             Mondays and Wednesdays 
2:00pm-3:20pm 
SH 105 
Lectures are a critical part of this course. We do not have a textbook that is closely 
followed in this course. Therefore, your timely comprehension on any given topic are 
extremely important. Lecture slides will be posted the day before each lecture on 
Canvas. They will remain available on Canvas throughout the semester.  
 
Recitations: 
 
Section A: 
Recitation Friday 11:00am-11:50pm      
WEH 4625 
 
Section B: 
Recitation Friday 12:00pm-12:50pm   
WEH 5302 
 
Section C:  
Recitation Friday 1:00pm-1:50pm 
 
WEH 5302 
 
Section D:  
Recitation Friday 2:00pm-2:50pm 
 
GHC 4301 
 
Section E:  
Recitation Friday 3:00pm-3:50pm 
 
WEH 4625 
 
Section F:  
Recitation Friday 10:00am-10:50am  
WEH 5415 
 
 
 
Students are highly encouraged to attend recitation sessions since they will focus on 
problem solving skills and help students to comprehend and solidify the concepts taught 
during lecture. Recitations will not be recorded. 
 
Labs:     Small Group Meetings: Sundays, Mondays, & Tuesdays, Ansys Hall C02 
Students will be divided into “small groups” of four to five students with two designated 
teaching assistants (TAs). These small groups will meet once weekly for a one-hour 
session in the TechSpark classroom (Ansys Hall C02). These group meetings will take 
place on Sunday, Monday, or Tuesday afternoon, and specific meeting times will be 
determined during the first week of classes. TAs will check off circuit functions from 
the previous week’s lab and then advise students for the coming week’s lab. 
Each student will receive a lab kit containing all the components, materials, and test 
equipment necessary to complete all of the labs. Lab equipment will be distributed 
during the first two weeks of classes, and lab exercises are designed to be completed 
anywhere (at home, TechSpark, etc.). 
 
Course Activities: 
 

 
4 
 
In order help students assess how well they are understanding the material being presented 
in class, there are a number of course activities that provide feedback to the students on their 
progress. 
 
Exams: 
 
The course lectures are broadly divided into three parts.  At the end of each part, there 
will be an exam covering primarily the material presented in that section. There will not 
be a cumulative final exam in this course although materials from previous part(s) may 
still appear on a given exam. The three exams will be given over one lecture period on 
the following dates: 
 
Exam 1:    Wednesday, Sept. 25th ,   Regular Lecture Time and Classroom. 
Exam 2:    Wednesday, Oct. 30th,     
Regular Lecture Time and Classroom. 
Exam 3:    Final Exam date, 
  Regular Lecture Duration. Final Exam location. 
 
All exams are to be taken during the scheduled exam date and time. Make-up exams are 
highly discouraged. If you are unable to take an exam at the scheduled time (for a valid 
reason, which should be limited to extreme emergencies), you must contact the 
instructor at least one week prior to the originally scheduled exam time to schedule a 
make-up exam, else you might receive a zero for that exam. Make-ups will generally be 
more difficult than the originally scheduled exam. The format of the make-up exam is 
up to the instructor, and may be in a different format such as an oral exam with the 
student asked to work problems on a white board. 
 
If you have special circumstances approved by the Disabled Student Services office, 
please make arrangements with the instructors at least 72 hours before the scheduled 
exam time.  
 
 
Quizzes: 
A multiple-choice style quiz will be given at the end of each lecture using the quiz 
platform on Canvas. Each quiz usually consists of three problems and these quiz 
problems serve the purpose of reviewing the lecture material just presented. Students 
need to finish each quiz within 36 hours of the end of the lecture.  
 
 
Homework: 
Homework will be posted on Tuesdays and it is due the following Tuesday at 10pm. 
Doing homework assignments is the best way to reinforce the understanding of the 
material being covered in class. Homework will be submitted via Gradescope. You will 
upload a scan (pdf) or photo (jpg) of your solution to each problem.  
 
You may work together on mastering an understanding of each of the homework 
problems; that is, learning how to set up the equations that embody the homework 

 
5 
 
problem and learning how to solve them. However, the actual written solutions to the 
problems that you upload to Gradescope must be your own work.  You should NOT 
submit someone else’s solutions. You should NOT just copy someone else’s solutions 
and submit them.  These actions constitute cheating. You are strongly encouraged to 
make sure you can do each problem by yourself independently. 
 
Laboratory: 
A one-hour session per lab assignment will be held with your assigned TAs together 
with your designated five-student group in TechSpark. Each lab requires an independent 
in-person demonstration of the circuits or systems that each student has constructed and 
their function to his/her designated TA along with explanations and ability to answer 
questions. Students should keep their circuit wiring neatly so that good visual can be 
achieved for TA to see. Messy circuit wiring may affect adequate assessment of your 
building work, impacting your lab grades in an unwanted way.  
 
Your lab grade will consist of the following two components: 
1) Answers to all questions listed in your lab handout. These must be completed by 
each student individually and submitted online through Gradescope by 10pm on 
the Thursday (Pittsburgh Time) of the lab due week.  
2) In-person demonstration of the required functions of the constructed circuit/system 
or/and the functional program codes within three days after the online lab 
submission. This will occur during each week’s small group meeting in TechSpark. 
 
You should complete all Labs to pass the course. Failure to submit a lab session and 
conduct independent demonstration will result in a score of zero for the lab that week. If 
you miss a lab session, you are expected to make up that lab session before the semester 
ends. Any missing lab will result in a failure to pass the course.   
 
Late Policy:  
Late homework and labs are accepted up to three days late – but there is a 10% late penalty 
per day. In general, we don’t accept assignments after three days late because we need to 
post solutions on Canvas 
Should you need additional time, please speak with your group TA or an instructor. 
Depending upon the circumstances, extensions and/or reduced late penalties may be 
possible.  
 
Grading Policy:  
Your grade will be calculated using the following method: 
5%  
Quizzes* (There will be a quiz following each lecture on Canvas) 
20%     Homework  
45%  Lab (no drops) 
30%  3 Exam Scores (each exam 10%) 
*Quiz grading:  :   1 correct = 50%, 2 correct = 90%  and  3 correct = 100% 
 

 
6 
 
 
While lower cutoffs may be used, the following cutoffs are guaranteed: 
>=90 A 
>=80 B 
>=70 C 
>=60 D 
 
 
 
Re-grades:  
You have 1 week from the time an exam, quiz or lab assignment is available to be picked-up 
to ask for a re-grade. To request a re-grade, write a brief summary of the alleged grading 
error(s) and attach it to the work you’d like to have re-graded and submit it to the Course 
Hub. Be aware that a request for a re-grade of any portion of an exam or quiz means that the 
entire exam or quiz is subject to re-grade, and that there is a possibility that your grade could 
be lowered as well as raised by this process. Unless instructed otherwise, all regrade 
requests must be made via Gradescope.  
 
Attendance: 
Attendance is expected at all lecture, recitation, and lab sections. If attendance is not 
reasonably possible, please review the lecture slides and course materials, come to office 
hours and ask questions to the course staff, as needed. Attendance at small group meetings 
is mandatory.  
 
 
Any in person meeting associated with the class, whether group or individual, requires 
complains with the University’s guidelines, i.e. “Tartan’s Responsibility”: 
 
• https://www.cmu.edu/coronavirus/students/tartans-responsibility.html