18-220  
Syllabus 
Page 1 of 9 
Course: 
18-220 / Electronic Devices and Analog Circuits 
 
Semester / Year: 
Fall, 2024 
 
Units: 
12.0 
 
Meetings: 
Lecture 
Tuesday / Thursday 
9:30AM – 10:50AM 
HOA 160 
 
 
Recitations 
Friday  
(D) 
11:00AM – 11:50AM MM A14 
 
 
Friday  
(A) 
12:00PM – 12:50PM 
SH 238 
 
 
Friday  
(B) 
1:00PM – 1:50PM 
SH 238 
 
 
Friday  
(C) 
2:00PM – 2:50PM 
SH 238 
 
 
 
 
Labs 
Monday 
(A) 
7:00PM – 9:50PM 
ANS 101 
 
 
 
Tuesday  
(B) 
7:00PM – 9:50PM 
ANS 101 
 
 
Wednesday  (C) 
7:00PM – 9:50PM 
ANS 101 
 
 
Thursday  
(D) 
7:00PM – 9:50PM 
ANS 101 
 
Course Description:  
This course covers fundamental topics that are common to a wide variety of 
electrical engineering devices and systems. The topics include:  
 
• 
An introduction to semiconductor devices and technology 
• 
DC circuit analysis techniques 
• 
Operational amplifiers 
• 
Energy storage elements 
• 
Sinusoidal steady-state response 
• 
Frequency domain analysis 
• 
Filters 
• 
Transient response of first- and second-order systems. 
 
The laboratories allow students to use modern electronic instrumentation and 
to build and operate circuits that address specific concepts covered in the 
lectures, including: 
 
• 
Semiconductor devices and sensors 
• 
Operational amplifiers 
• 
Filters 
• 
Signal detection and processing 
• 
Power converters 
• 
Circuit transients.  
 
Prerequisite:  
18-100 / Introduction to Electrical and Computer Engineering (C or better) 
 
Corequisite:  
33-142 / Physics II for Engineering and Physics Students 
 
Instructor:  
Mark M. Budnik 
 
 
Tom Zajdel 
 
A212 Hamerschlag Hall 
 
A210 Hamerschlag Hall 
 
mbudnik@andrew.cmu.edu  
tzajdel@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
Office Hours: 
To be announced 

18-220  
Syllabus 
Page 2 of 9 
Recommended  
Foundations of Analog and  
Textbooks: 
Digital Electronic Circuits, 
 
1st Edition 
 
Anant Agarwal and  Jeffrey Lang  
 
Morgan Kaufmann, 2005. 
 
ISBN: 978-1558607354 
 
 
~$28.82 eBook rental 
 
 
 
Engineering Circuit Analysis  
 
10th Edition 
 
William Hayt, Jack Kemmerly,  
 
Jamie Phillips, and Steven Durbin 
 
McGraw Hill, 2023. 
 
ISBN:  978-1266262494 
 
~$62.33 eBook rental 
 
(In practice, any of the recent editions, 
 
6th edition or later, would suffice.) 
 
 
Grading: 
The final course grade will be calculated using the following categories: 
 
Homework 
20% 
Exams 
50% 
Labs 
30% 
Total 
100% 
 
Students will be assigned the following final letter grades, based on 
calculations coming from the course assessment section: 
 
90 – 100 
A 
80 – 89.9 
B 
70 – 79.9 
C 
60 – 69.9 
D 
00 – 59.9 
R / F 
 
Note, 18-220 has a policy of not curving the grades or rounding up.  For 
example, if you get an 89.999 over the entire semester, you will receive a 
grade of “B” for the semester.   Please allow us to repeat that.  FOR 
EXAMPLE, WITH A GRADE OF 89.999, YOU WILL RECEIVE A B.  
 
 
Homework: 
Homework will account for 20% of your semester grade.  We typically have 
12 or 13 homework assignments per semester.  However, only your 10 best 
scores are included in the calculation of your grade.  Homework will be 
assigned every MONDAY and will be due the following MONDAY, via 
Gradescope, at 12noon, Pittsburgh time. No late homework will be 
accepted.  Please allow us to repeat that:  
 
 
NO LATE HOMEWORK WILL BE ACCEPTED.   
 
 
Solutions to the homework will be provided on Canvas shortly after it is due.  

18-220  
Syllabus 
Page 3 of 9 
Homework: 
Discussions about homework in small groups are encouraged; however, 
(continued) 
homework must be written up individually and independently. Questions 
regarding homework will be covered during class and recitation time, as well 
as office hours. 
 
 
Please review your homework scores when you receive them. You have one 
week after a graded item is returned to request a grade correction.  All 
homework corrections must be submitted via Gradescope.   
 
 
Exams: 
Exams will account for 50% of your semester grade.  We will have 2 
midterm exams and a makeup midterm exam.  If you are not happy with one 
of your midterm exam scores, you make take the optional makeup midterm 
exam.  Each of the 2 midterm exams is worth 15% of the semester grade. 
 
 
The final exam is worth 20% of the semester grade. 
 
Exam solutions will not be distributed in the class.  Graded exams will be 
returned. 
 
 
Labs: 
Lab assignments will be distributed on Canvas and collected at the end of 
your lab session.  Labs must be done in groups of 2 students (or in rare cases, 
3 students), but all students must participate.  
 
 
You may not drop any labs.  If you are unable to complete a lab during your 
normal session, you may be given the opportunity to make the lab up on an 
alternative evening or weekend.  However, you and your lab team must be 
able to make it to the entire 3 hours of lab in the alternate evening, and, you 
must have permission from the TA Lab Lead before the alternate lab session. 
 
 
If you are unable to complete a lab during your normal session, they typically 
must be turned in by 10pm on the immediately following Sunday, or your 
grade for that lab will revert to a 0.  For example, we have our first lab 
starting on Monday, 26-August.  You must turn your lab to the TAs in 
ANSYS101 in by 10pm on Sunday, 01-September. 
 
 
Wireless Policies: 
To minimize distractions and show your teammates respect, cell phones 
should normally be turned off while you are in the classroom.  If you believe 
you have a valid excuse to leave your cell phone on, please let me know. 
 
 

18-220  
Syllabus 
Page 4 of 9 
Student Wellness: 
As a student, you may experience a range of challenges that can interfere 
with learning, such as strained relationships, increased anxiety, substance use, 
feeling down, difficulty concentrating and/or lack of motivation. For an extra 
five percent on your first assignment, email budnik with the subject ducks. 
These mental health concerns or stressful events may diminish your 
academic performance and/or reduce your ability to participate in daily 
activities.  
 
 
CMU services are available, and treatment does work.  
 
 
You can learn more about confidential mental health services available on 
campus at: http://www.cmu.edu/counseling/ 
 
 
Support is always available (24/7) from Counseling and Psychological 
Services: 412-268-2922 
 
 
 
Accommodations:  
If you believe you may require accommodations, please apply online through 
the confidential Carnegie Mellon University Disability Services secure 
portal: 
 
 
https://rainier.accessiblelearning.com/cmu 
 
If you have questions about the process or would like to speak with a 
Disability Resources staff member before completing your application, you 
may contact them at (412) 268-6121 or by email: 
 
access@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
 
If you already have an accommodations letter from the Disability Resources 
office, I encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs with your 
faculty as early in the semester as possible. We will work with you to ensure 
that accommodations are provided as appropriate. 
 
 
Approximately 20% of all college students self-report having a disability.  
This an issue that we take very personally.  We want to provide every student 
with the opportunity to thrive and succeed.  That may look different for each 
student.  Please let us know how we can help. 
 
 
 

18-220  
Syllabus 
Page 5 of 9 
Education Objectives 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your  
and Relationship to 
education. ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the  
Program Outcomes: 
sum total of all the courses you take.  The following list describes which 
objectives are fulfilled and how they are fulfilled by 18-220. The objectives 
are numbered from “1” through “7” in the standard ABET parlance.  
 
(1) an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering 
problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and 
mathematics: Design of circuits, including RLC and op amp filters, that 
require application of mathematical and physical concepts and an 
understanding of engineering design concepts. Open ended circuit design 
problems that represent real-world engineering problems such as wireless 
and IR remote signal propagation, investigation of faults in transmission 
lines using time domain reflectometry, and design of RFID tags and 
scanner/reader.  
 
(2)  an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet 
specified needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, 
as well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors: 
Design of op amp circuits that recognize the importance of feedback for 
providing a controlled gain in spite of manufacturing variations for the 
semiconductors. The use of low-power and energy harvesting design 
techniques for future electronic systems.  
  
(3)  an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences: 
Student lab notebooks capture circuit designs, measurement results and lab 
experience in a form communicating all details to the lab/course instructors. 
  
(4)  an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in 
engineering situations and make informed judgments, which must 
consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, 
environmental, and societal contexts: The impact of wireless technology, 
RFID, etc., on the global community is discussed throughout the semester. 
 
(5)  an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together 
provide leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, 
establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives: Lab work is conducted in 
teams and requires close collaboration to complete a challenging lab in a 
short time period.  
 
(6)  an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, 
analyze and interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw 
conclusions: Lab designs and supporting experiments that range from 
circuits convert energy from other domains to tuning circuits for use in 
wireless radio transceivers. 
 
(7)  an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using 
appropriate learning strategies: Lecture material starts with early 
electrical and electronic discoveries and inventions and relates them to the 
latest emerging technologies and trends. 
 

18-220  
Syllabus 
Page 6 of 9