18-240: Structure and Design of Digital Systems 
Spring Semester 2025 
Course Personnel: 
Instructors: 
Bill Nace
Ziad Youssfi 
A206 Hamerschlag Hall 
A202 Hamerschlag Hall 
wnace@cmu.edu 
zyoussfi@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: 1:00-3:00pm Wednesdays Office Hours: TBD 
 
calendly.com/billnace/office-visit 
Teaching Assistants: 
Rishabh Cowlagi
Lilly Das
Caroline Kasuba
Siddarth Kunisetty
Siena Lee
Jaehyun Lim
Tristan Liu
Govind Malasani
Vikram Mani
Nicholas Ortiz
William Privratsky
Richard Sbaschnig
Vishal Setty
Akul Singh
Rudy Sorenson  
Alice Tang
Trey Wagner
Aaron Xu  
David Zoota 
Academic Services: 
ECE Course Hub (aka Academic Services Center) 
1113 Hamerschlag Hall 
The ECE Hub is open Monday-Friday, 9am-5pm 
Class Schedule: 
Lecture:  
Tuesday & Thursday, 9:30 a.m. – 10:50 a.m., POS A35 
Lab:  
A 
Tuesday: 
7 p.m. - 9:50 p.m., HH 1305 
B 
Wednesday: 
7 p.m. - 9:50 p.m., HH 1305 
C 
Thursday: 
7 p.m. - 9:50 p.m., HH 1305 
Small Group Meetings: 
A	
Friday: 
11 a.m. - 11:50 a.m., TBD 
B	
Friday: 
12 p.m. - 12:50 p.m., TBD 
C	
Friday: 
1 p.m. - 1:50 p.m., TBD 
Weekly lab sections are REQUIRED — we enforce attendance, so don't show up late. 

Pre-requisite: 18-100, grade of C or better. 
Undergraduate Course Designation: Core 
Undergraduate Course Area: Computer Hardware 
Course Description: 
This course introduces basic issues in design and verification of modern digital 
systems. Topics include: Boolean algebra, digital number systems and computer 
arithmetic, combinational logic design and simplification, sequential logic design and 
optimization, register-transfer design of digital systems, basic processor organization 
and instruction set issues, assembly language programming and debugging, and a 
hardware description language. Emphasis is on the fundamentals: the levels of 
abstraction and hardware description language methods that allow designers to cope 
with hugely complex systems, and connections to practical hardware implementation 
problems. Students will use computer-aided digital design software and actual 
hardware implementation laboratories to learn about real digital systems. 
Textbook: 
Required - Logic Design and Verification Using SystemVerilog by Don Thomas.  ISBN 
9781523364022.  Available from Amazon. 
Recommended - Digital Design and Computer Architecture, 2nd edition, David Harris 
and Sarah Harris 
Course Canvas: 
We will use Canvas to communicate with you (announcements, copies of handouts, 
lab support files, etc).  Access is through: www.cmu.edu/canvas. 
Piazza Question Website: 
The 18-240 staff is committed to answering any questions you may have in order to 
help clarify concepts and concerns.  We use the Piazza website as our primary 
mechanism to help with such questions.  Students are encouraged to answer, 
discuss, or comment on any question posted on Piazza.  Our course page is found at 
https://piazza.com/cmu/spring2025/18240/home. 
Mailing list: 
Any email sent to ece240-staff@lists.andrew.cmu.edu will be delivered to all TAs and 
the Professors.  We encourage you to use Piazza for questions, but will answer 
anything sent to this email list as well.  Please use this email address rather than 
sending email directly to a particular TA or Professor. 

Homework Handin 
Homework will be turned in using Gradescope.  There are some complications about 
handin, some of which are requirements of Gradescope, others result from the grading 
mechanisms we employ in order to be efficient in such a large class.  As a result, you 
are expected to follow handin directions carefully.  If you do not follow directions, 
your grade will likely be a zero.  Turning in code (SystemVerilog or ASM) that does not 
compile, or code that does not match the provided module headers will also result in 
a zero grade. 
Let me repeat that:  
Carefully follow directions, else your homework will receive a ZERO! 
Grading Algorithm: 
Your grade in 18-240 will be calculated based on your performance on a number of 
events.  A weighted average will be computed using the following weights: 
Weight
Event
25%
11 Homework exercises.  Homework will be due each Monday, for 
the most part.  No grade will be given for late homework.  The 2 
lowest scoring homeworks will be dropped to allow for handin 
troubles, illness, travel, interviews, weddings, funerals or other 
personal issues.
30%
7 Laboratory exercises.  The "Tech Ethics" experience counts as a 
laboratory exercise.  Prompt attendance is mandatory.
25%
2 Midterm exams
20%
Final exam.  Any student who has a 90% or greater weighted 
average, has taken both midterm exams, and has no AIVs, will be 
excused from taking the final exam.  In calculating the weighted 
average for purpose of the excusal, no grades will be dropped.

When calculating mid-term grades, no homework will be dropped.  Both midterm and 
final grades will be assigned based on the following grading contract.  The instructors 
reserve the right to assign higher grades than guaranteed by the contract.  Such a 
modification will apply equally to all students in the course (i.e. in no instance will a 
student with a lower average than another student obtain a higher letter grade) 
Extra Credit: Only graded events offered to all students in the course will be 
considered for the final grade.  No individual will be offered “extra-credit” or a “make-
up project” to improve their grade, as that would not be fair to other students.  If you 
wish to have a better grade, don’t wait until after the final to ask -- the only way to get 
a better grade is to do better work (and thus learn more) throughout the semester. 
Grading Appeals:  If you believe there has been a mistake in the grading of any 
assignment (Homework, Lab or Exam), then please bring it to our notice so we might 
correct it.  Grade appeals must be submitted in writing within 1 week of the date 
where material was returned/released.  Appeals may be made on Gradescope (for 
homework and exams) or on Piazza (in a private post). 
Accommodations for Students with Disabilities: 
If you have a disability and are registered with the Office of Disability Resources, 
please come and talk to me to discuss your needs.  You will also need to use their 
online system to formally notify me of your accommodations. I will work with you to 
ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate.   
If you suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from accommodations 
but are not yet registered with the Office of Disability Resources, I encourage you to 
contact them at access@andrew.cmu.edu. 
Weighted Average
Letter Grade
>= 90%
A
>= 80%
B
>= 70%
C
>= 60%
D
< 60%
R

Your Health and Well-being 
Things at CMU can get stressful at times. Please remember to take good care of 
yourself! It is important for you to stay healthy, and to reach out to your support 
network and to other resources that can help you when things start feeling difficult. 
Know that you are not alone - all of us can feel overwhelmed at times, and all of us 
benefit from help and support during those times. There are several resources that we 
encourage you to make use of if you are going through any sort of struggle. 
Sometimes, even if you don't think that you need it, or that it's not serious enough to 
warrant reaching out, you may be surprised at how friends, family, course staff, and 
professionals can help you - consider reaching out to any of them you trust for help, 
or to get connected to resources that can provide the help you could use. 
An excellent resource at CMU is Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) - they 
are excellent listeners, and can help you through a wide variety of situations (including 
ones that many of you may not consider when you hear the terms counseling and 
psychology).  CaPS is available for students on and off campus, and can help you 
with situations such as academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings such as 
anxiety or depression. 
Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) 
https://www.cmu.edu/counseling/ 
(412) 268-2922 
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call someone 
immediately, day or night: 
CaPS: (412) 268-2922 
Re:solve Crisis Network: (888) 796-8226 
If the situation is life threatening, call the police 
On campus: CMU Police: (412) 268-2323 
Off campus: 911 
Finally, if you have any questions about this, or would like to talk, please do not 
hesitate to reach out to one of us. 
Policies Related to Diversity and Inclusion 
We believe that every human being is special and precious and deserving of respect.  
Unfortunately, many have been treated in non-respectful ways, often horrifyingly so, 
based on their gender, race, age, sexuality, disabilities, or other status.  We will do 
everything possible to ensure that all students are treated with the respect they 
deserve while participating in this course.  Such respect requires that every student's 
diverse learning needs are addressed and that all student's diverse perspectives are 
treated as a source of strength and a benefit for all in the course. 

If you feel you have been treated otherwise by professors, course staff or other 
students, you are encouraged to discuss the situation with the professors.  We will 
take the situation seriously, provide you with anonymity, and act on the information. 
You should also know that there are university-level resources as well: 
• Campus Climate and Bias Reporting Protocol: cmu.ethicspoint.com. More 
information is available at the CCBRP website: cmu.edu/title-ix/how-to-report-+-
options-for-resolution/ccbrp/index.html 
Further, your suggestions on how we can do a better job in these areas is encouraged 
and appreciated.  Please let us know of any areas of improvement. 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education.  
ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the 
courses you take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 18-240 
and in what manner they are fulfilled.  The objectives are numbered from “1” through 
“7” in the standard ABET parlance.  Those objectives not fulfilled by 18-240 have 
been omitted from the following list. 
(1) An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering 
problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and 
mathematics:  The course poses many problems; on homework, in labs, 
during exams, and for in-class exercises; for the student to formulate and 
solve using good engineering practice.  The student will use mathematical and 
engineering concepts to model and design digital circuits and to solve 
complex problems in the digital design and computer architecture domain. 
(2) An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet 
specified needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, 
as well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors: 
The course is an introduction to the design of digital circuits, so the student 
will start to gain insight into the process of designing components and then 
designing systems using those components.  Some economic and 
manufacturability constraints will be discussed.  At all appropriate points, 
safety will be emphasized. 
(3) An ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences: 
Students practice their communication skills during laboratory exercises as 
well as the basic written communication of problem solutions on homework 
and exams.  In all such cases, the audience is small.  During a large active-
learning exercise, students review their team's work and report results to the 
class. 

(4) An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in 
engineering situations and make informed judgments, which must 
consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, 
environmental, and societal contexts: Students will participate in an "ethics 
lab" during the first week of class.  In addition, most homework assignments 
will require a thoughtful answer in essay form, to an ethical question. 
(5) An ability to function effectively on a team whose members together 
provide leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, 
establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives:  Students will operate in 
2-person teams for the laboratory exercises.  These are not multi-disciplinary 
teams, but the student will start to learn teamwork and team management 
skills, particularly conflict resolution.  They also work on 4-person teams 
during an active learning exercise. 
(6) An ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, 
analyze and interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw 
conclusions: Laboratory exercises provide for the opportunity to conduct 
experiments.  The student will design experiments and analyze data 
throughout the debugging process in order to generate a functioning lab. 
(7) An ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using 
appropriate learning strategies:  During a full-period active-learning 
exercise, students work in teams of four to examine new problem statements 
in computer architecture and attempt to modify the course CPU design to 
meet these new requirements.  Students use resources they find on the 
internet to provide context and ideas for their solutions.