Carnegie Mellon University 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
18-290  
    
 
 
 
                                                    Fall 2024 
Signals and Systems 
Course Syllabus 
 
Instructors 
 
Pulkit Grover  
 
pgrover@ece.cmu.edu 
Office:  HH B-202 
 
 
Tom Sullivan  
 
tms@ece.cmu.edu 
Office:  HH A-209 
 
 
 
Teaching Assistants 
 
Vikram Bhagavatula   
vbhagava@andrew.cmu.edu                     
Jason Botros   
 
jbotros@andrew.cmu.edu 
Surya Chandramouleeswaran suryac@andrew.cmu.edu 
Satvik Dixit   
 
satvikd@andrew.cmu.edu   
Ricky Gao  
 
 
rickyg@andrew.cmu.edu 
Shivi Gupta   
 
shivig@andrew.cmu.edu     
Bakari Hassan  
 
bhassan@andrew.cmu.edu 
Simon Jin 
 
 
xjin2@andrew.cmu.edu    
Shreya Ajay Kale 
 
shreyaak@andrew.cmu.edu 
Ganghui Lin   
 
ganghuil@andrew.cmu.edu       
Amit Thomas   
 
amitthom@andrew.cmu.edu    
Hao Wu 
 
 
haowu4@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
 
 
Course Web Page 
 
We will use the Canvas course system for our class web page. Information about the staff’s office hours 
and location for those hours will be available in the Syllabus section of the web page.  Homework 
assignments as well as homework solutions will be posted to Canvas.  Your grades will be available first 
on Gradescope then exported to Canvas after the re-grade period (see later section) has closed.  We 
encourage you to check your scores regularly and bring to our attention any discrepancies between what 
grades you received written on your work and what is listed on Canvas.  Students are also responsible 
for any information conveyed to the class via Canvas announcements. 
 

 
 
Course Description 
 
The goal of this course is to introduce students to the basic concepts of signals and systems.  We’ll study 
tools for the representation of signals in different domains (time and frequency) and the interaction 
between signals and systems.  We focus our attention on linear systems.  We study both techniques for 
continuous and discrete time systems and signals. Topics covered include Fourier Series, Fourier 
Transforms, Discrete Fourier Transforms, Laplace Transforms and Z-Transforms, Convolution, Impulse 
Response, Transfer Functions, Poles and Zeros, Filtering, and Filter Design. 
 
The skills and knowledge gained in this course are essential for the analysis and design of many real-
world systems. Examples of such systems can be found in telecommunications (telephony, radio, 
television, data communications, fax); signal processing (audio, radar, sonar, video compression, image 
processing, speech processing); automatic control (chemical plant control, airplane control, cruise 
control); biomedical engineering (ECG, EEG, MRI); robotics (manipulation, navigation); Machine 
Learning, Deep Learning, Natural Language Processing, etc.  
 
This course will also provide you with the terminology needed to communicate with others working in 
these areas.  By the end of the semester, you should be able to:  
 
 
Model physical systems using mathematical models learned in this course,  
 
 
Use a system block approach to describe engineering applications, 
 
 
Solve the mathematical models for input/output relationships using time-domain and frequency-
domain methods, and  
 
 
Understand the limitations and advantages of the mathematical models employed.  
 
This course is the entry point for courses in Telecommunications, Signal Processing, Control, Robotics, 
ML/DL/NLP/AI.   
 
  
 
Recommended Reference Textbook 
 
Signals and Systems, 2nd edition, by Alan V. Oppenheim and Alan S. Willsky with S. Hamid Nawab 
Prentice Hall, 1997 
 
Slides 
 
There are no pre-prepared lecture slides for 18-290.  We prefer to be flexible with the course material as 
it is presented, allowing the lectures to react easily to student questions.   
 

 
 
Course schedule: 
 
Lectures: 
 
Monday and Wednesday, 10:00 am – 11:50 am, HOA 160. 
 
We will not be recording the lectures or recitations.  It will be important to be present in class to ask 
questions and to participate in the dialog that takes place during lecture. 
 
Recitations:  
 
Section A: 
Friday, 9:00 am – 9:50 am, BH A53      
Section B: 
Friday, 10:00 am – 10:50 am, POS 151   
 
Section C: 
Friday, 11:00 am – 11:50 am, POS 153   
 
Section D: 
Friday, 12:00 pm – 12:50 pm in SH 234  
 
Recitations may be different this fall than standard recitations.  If enough locations can be found, we 
will meet in smaller groups of about 10-12 students with a group leader TA.  Please attend your 
scheduled recitation/group time as we are a very full class and we can’t take seats from others registered 
for a specific section.  Recitation attendance will not be formally taken, but this is your chance to see 
some problems worked and to ask extra questions, so attendance is encouraged. 
 
Handouts: 
 
All course materials will be available via Canvas and Homework and Exams via Gradescope.  
 
Homework and Labs: 
 
Weekly homework problem sets will be distributed on Canvas/Gradescope on Fridays by 4:30 pm and 
will be due via Gradescope on the following Friday by 4:30 pm.  Please allow yourself time to upload 
your homework to account for possible internet glitches.  Graded homework will also be available via 
Gradescope.  While discussing HW with your classmates is allowed, you must do your own work where 
the mechanics of solving the problems are concerned.  No group HWs.   
 
We are in the process of developing some new labs for 18-290 for use in future versions of 290.  If ready 
for beta-testing, we may use one or two of these this semester. 
 
Exams: 
 
Three exams will be given on the following dates: 
 
Wednesday, October 2 (week 6) 
Wednesday, November 13 (week 12) 
Final Exam period when our time is scheduled (This will not be a 3 hour “final” exam.  It will be 1 hr. 
and 50 minutes as the other two and will be weighted the same, it will just be scheduled during the final 
exam period.  It will be comprehensive though.) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Exam Taking 
 
All exams are to be taken during the scheduled exam date and time.  Make-up exams are highly 
discouraged.  If you are unable to take an exam at the scheduled time (for a valid reason), you must meet 
with the instructor within one week of the originally scheduled exam time to schedule a make-up exam, 
else you will receive a zero for that exam.  Make-ups will be given at the convenience of the instructor 
and will generally be more difficult than the originally scheduled exam.  The format of the make-up 
exam is up to the instructor.   
 
If you have special circumstances approved by the Disabled Student Services office, it is up to you to 
make arrangements with the instructor at least 72 hours before the scheduled exam time.  Failure to do 
so will result in you taking the exam in the same place and at the same time (and for the same length of 
time) as the rest of the class. 
 
Grading: 
 
Your final grade will be calculated using the following method: 
 
10% 
Pop quizzes in lecture.  We are planning 6 of these, the lowest quiz score will be dropped. 
40%  Homework (lowest homework score dropped) 
 
 
 
 
 
50%  Three term exams (lowest exam score worth 10%, other two worth 20%) 
 
While lower cutoffs may be used, the following cutoffs are guaranteed: 
 
>90% A 
>80% B 
>70% C 
>60% D 
 
Re-grades 
 
Re-grades on any course materials will only be given if a serious mistake in the grading has taken place 
and should be requested through Gradescope.  The course instructors are the only persons to be 
approached directly for questions about a re-grade of any course material.  No material will be accepted 
for a re-grade more than one week after it has been available for viewing by the student.  Requesting a 
re-grade does not guarantee that you will be awarded more credit for your work.  The grader who graded 
the material will review the work and make a determination, possibly through consultation with others 
on the course staff.  It is very important to be clear and concise with work that you are turning in to be 
graded.  The graders must be able to understand what your intentions were in your solution to a problem.   
 
Cheating: 
 
Any student caught cheating in this course will receive an R and the facts of the case and the penalty will 
be reported to the Dean of Student Affairs.  While students may work in groups to discuss homework 
assignments, copying from someone else’s homework (present or past years or past year’s solutions), lab 
write-up, or exam or allowing another student to copy his/her work, will be considered as cheating.