18-341: Logic Design and Verification 
Spring Semester 2025 
Course Personnel: 
Instructor: 
Bill Nace 
A206 Hamerschlag Hall 
wnace@cmu.edu 
Office Hours: Wednesdays 1-3pm 
Or make an appointment here: 
calendly.com/billnace/office-visit 
Teaching Assistants: 
Mingkai Chen
Feya Epel
YJ Eum 
Nicole Feng
Rashi Kejriwal
Perrin Tong 
Yu-Ching Wu
Victor Zayakov 
Academic Services: 
ECE Course Hub 
1112 Hamerschlag Hall 
The ECE Hub is open Monday-Friday, 9am-5pm 
Class Schedule: 
Lecture: 	
Tuesdays and Thursdays, 3:30 pm – 4:50 pm, POS 153 
Recitation:	 Fridays, 1:00 pm - 1:50 pm, POS 151 
Course Description: 
This course is a second level logic design course, studying the techniques of 
designing at the register-transfer and logic levels of complex digital systems using 
modern modeling, simulation, synthesis, and verification tools.  Topics include 
register-transfer level systems (i.e., finite state machines and data paths), bus and 
communication system interfacing (such as a simplified USB interface), discrete-event 
simulation, testbench organization, assertion-based verification and functional 
coverage.  Design examples will be drawn from bus and communication interfaces, 
and computation systems, emphasizing how these systems are designed and how 
such functionality can be verified.  A modern hardware description language, such as 
SystemVerilog, will serve as the basis for uniting these topics.  Homework and design 
projects will serve to exercise these topics. 

Informal Course Description: 
There are several threads to the course.  Taken together, these threads will give you a 
deep insight into modern design methodologies for the design of the logical hardware 
of digital integrated circuits, and interfaces between digital systems, including 
complex systems of multiple processors. 
• Register-transfer level design. The design of FSMs/Datapaths and communication 
interfaces in complex digital systems (e.g., a simplified USB) will be emphasized. 
These systems are highly concurrent requiring clock and/or handshake 
synchronization among cooperating finite state machines.  
• Modeling systems for synthesis. Widely used synthesis tools and advanced 
language semantics available in SystemVerilog will be used to illustrate these. 
• Testbench writing, assertion based verification, and functional coverage. We will 
introduce model checking techniques that allow assertions about a design to be 
specified and checked during simulation, and functional coverage techniques 
enabling you to measure how much of the design you have checked.  
• Modeling using SystemVerilog. No apologies: you will become a SystemVerilog 
guru. You’ll be able to wrap your hands around your laptop and correct Verilog will 
spew forth. You’ll be a wonderful 18-240 TA candidate, being able to just look at 
someone else’s code and immediately see the problem.  
Pre-requisite: 18-240 
Textbook: 
Required - Logic Design and Verification Using SystemVerilog by Don Thomas.  ISBN 
9781523364022.  Available from Amazon  This is the revised version. 
Course Canvas: 
We will use Canvas to communicate with you (copies of handouts, grades, etc).  
Access is through: www.cmu.edu/canvas. 
Piazza Question Website: 
The 18-341 staff is committed to answering any questions you may have in order to 
help clarify concepts and concerns.  We use the Piazza website as our primary 
mechanism to help with such questions.  Students are encouraged to answer, 
discuss, or comment on any question posted on Piazza.  Our course page is found at 
https://piazza.com/cmu/spring2025/18341/home. 

Mailing list: 
Any email sent to ece341-staff@lists.andrew.cmu.edu will be delivered to all TAs and 
the Professors.  We encourage you to use Piazza for questions, but will answer 
anything sent to this email list as well.  Please use this email address rather than 
sending email directly to a particular TA or Professor. 
Grading Algorithm: 
Your grade in 18-341 will be calculated based on your performance on a number of 
events.  A weighted average will be computed using the following weights: 
Both midterm and final grades will be assigned based on the following grading 
contract.  The instructors reserve the right to assign higher grades than guaranteed by 
the contract.  Such a modification will apply equally to all students in the course. 
Extra Credit: Only graded events offered to all students in the course will be 
considered for the final grade.  No individual will be offered “extra-credit” or a “make-
up project” to improve their grade, as that would not be fair to other students.  If you 
Weight
Event
30%
8 Homework exercises.  Homework will be due at the beginning of class 
on the due date.  No grade will be given for late homework.  No 
homework exercises will be dropped.
65%
5 Projects.  All projects must be attempted in order to pass the course.  
One project will be done in teams of two, all others are individual effort.  
You will have a single grace day for projects.
5%
End-of-course Activity.  Students who have not used their grace day nor 
had an academic integrity violation will automatically get full credit for this 
activity.  Such students may still do the activity to qualify for up to 2% 
extra credit.
Weighted Average
Letter Grade
>= 90%
A
>= 80%
B
>= 70%
C
>= 60%
D
< 60%
R

wish to have a better grade, don’t wait until after the final to ask -- the only way to get 
a better grade is to do better work (and thus learn more) throughout the semester. 
Grading Appeals:  If you believe there has been a mistake in the grading of any 
assignment (Homework or Project), then please bring it to our notice so we might 
correct it.  Grade appeals must be submitted in writing within 1 week to the ECE Hub. 
Incomplete:  A grade of Incomplete will not be given, except for in extraordinary 
circumstances.  The course is over on the last day of class. 
  
Your Health and Well-being 
Things at CMU can get stressful at times. Please remember to take good care of 
yourself! Now more than ever, with the additional sources of stress this semester, it is 
important for you to stay healthy, and to reach out to your support network and to 
other resources that can help you when things start feeling difficult. 
Know that you are not alone - all of us can feel overwhelmed at times (especially at a 
time like this), and all of us benefit from help and support during those times. Even 
though many of you are away from campus, there are still several resources that we 
encourage you to make use of if you are going through any sort of struggle. 
Sometimes, even if you don't think that you need it, or that it's not serious enough to 
warrant reaching out, you may be surprised at how friends, family, course staff, and 
professionals can help you - consider reaching out to any of them you trust for help, 
or to get connected to resources that can provide the help you could use. 
An excellent resource at CMU is Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) - they 
are excellent listeners, and can help you through a wide variety of situations (including 
ones that many of you may not consider when you hear the terms counseling and 
psychology).  CaPS is available for students on and off campus, and can help you 
with situations such as academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings such as 
anxiety or depression. 
Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) 
https://www.cmu.edu/counseling/ 
(412) 268-2922 
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call someone 
immediately, day or night: 
CaPS: (412) 268-2922 
Re:solve Crisis Network: (888) 796-8226 
If the situation is life threatening, call the police 
On campus: CMU Police: (412) 268-2323 
Off campus: 911 
Finally, if you have any questions about this, or would like to talk, please do not 
hesitate to reach out to one of us. 

Accommodations for Students with Disabilities: 
If you have a disability and are registered with the Office of Disability Resources, 
please come and talk to me to discuss your needs.  You wil also need to use their 
online system to formally notify me of your accommodations. I will work with you to 
ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate.   
If you suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from accommodations 
but are not yet registered with the Office of Disability Resources, I encourage you to 
contact them at access@andrew.cmu.edu. 
Policies Related to Diversity and Inclusion 
We believe that every human being is special and precious and deserving of respect.  
Unfortunately, many have been treated in non-respectful ways, often horrifyingly so, 
based on their gender, race, age, sexuality, disabilities, or other status.  We will do 
everything possible to ensure that all students are treated with the respect they 
deserve while participating in this course.  Such respect requires that every student's 
diverse learning needs are addressed and that all student's diverse perspectives are 
treated as a source of strength and a benefit for all in the course. 
If you feel you have been treated otherwise by the professor, course staff or other 
students, you are encouraged to discuss the situation with me.  I will take the situation 
seriously, provide you with anonymity, and act on the information. 
You should also know that there are university-level resources as well: 
• Campus Climate and Bias Reporting Protocol: cmu.ethicspoint.com. More 
information is available at the CCBRP website: cmu.edu/title-ix/how-to-report-+-
options-for-resolution/ccbrp/index.html 
Further, your suggestions on how we can do a better job in these areas is encouraged 
and appreciated.  Please let us know of any areas of improvement. 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education.  
ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the 
courses you take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 18-341 
and in what manner they are fulfilled.  The objectives are numbered from “1” through 
“7” in the standard ABET parlance.  Those objectives not fulfilled by 18-341 have 
been omitted from the following list. 
(1) an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering 
problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and 
mathematics.  The course poses many problems for the student to formulate 
and solve using good engineering practice.  The student will use mathematical 
and engineering concepts to model and design digital circuits and to solve 
complex problems in the digital design and computer architecture domain. 

(2) an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet 
specified needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, 
as well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors: 
The course is an advanced course on the design of digital systems, so the 
student will gain added insight into the process of designing components and 
then designing systems using those components.  Some economic and 
manufacturability constraints will be discussed.  
(3) an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences: 
Students practice their communication skills during project exercises, demos, 
and write-ups, as well as the basic written communication of problem 
solutions on homeworks.  
(5) an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together 
provide leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, 
establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives:  Students will operate in 2 
person teams for one project.  These are not multi-disciplinary teams, but the 
student will practice teamwork and team management skills. 
(6) an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze 
and interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions:  
Project exercises provide for the opportunity to conduct experiments. The 
student will design experiments (test vectors from testbenches) and analyze 
data throughout the debugging process in order to generate a functioning 
project. 
(7) an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using 
appropriate learning strategies:  The course will illustrate how design 
languages continue to evolve to support the changing needs of designers; 
these changing needs come from the changes in the underlying technologies. 
Some of the language features presented were standardized within the past 
couple years — these are not their older sibling’s design languages.  
Further, the End-of-Semester project will allow the student to investigate a 
concept and explore on their own to learn and communicate about new 
knowledge.