Ethics and Policy Issues in Computing (Fall 2024)
17-200/18-384
Lecture Time: Tuesdays and Thursdays 2:00-3:20 PM ET
Recitation Time: Fridays 2:00-3:20 PM ET
Location:
In-person: Scaife Hall Room 236
➢We do not record class to respect student privacy due to the sensitive nature of
discussions involving ethics and personal values.
Professor:
Michael Skirpan
●
Email: mskirpan@cmu.edu
●
Web: https://mwskirpan.com
●
Office hours
○
By appointment
○
Mike tends to work in his office (TCS Hall Rm. 314) Tues/Thurs 9A-1P for
drop-ins or as a good time to schedule with him.
Teaching Assistants:
Aditi Narasimhan (aditin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Debeshi Ghosh (debeshig@andrew.cmu.edu)
Kennedy Botts (kbotts@andrew.cmu.edu)
Khinezin Win (kwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Rachel Wilson (rbwilson@andrew.cmu.edu)
1

Sameeksha Garg (sameeksg@andrew.cmu.edu)
Sophia Holland (sophiaho@andrew.cmu.edu)
Tatym Rasmussen (tatymr@andrew.cmu.edu)
Grading:
●
Major Assignments (50%)
○
10% each across 5 assignments
●
Written Exam (20%)
●
Class Engagement (20%)
●
Final Group Presentations (10%)
Course Structure
Please be aware that this course uses Canvas and you should be regularly checking Canvas for
the most up to date information on the class.
Lecture Time
Class is held in person, attendance is taken each day, and our lecture time does involve critical
points of student engagement. This is a discussion heavy class so expect to be called on and
prepared to talk during class.
Each lecture will involve moderated discussion with the support of our TAs and occasionally
course guests. Every single lecture will have many points of open dialogue, analysis, and Q&A
with students. We will be tracking student participation in the class dialogue which will contribute
to your grade (see below).
There will be lecture slides that distill core content, definitions, references, and examples.
However, most classes will open with questions and/or cases that motivate this content. We will
use slides and content to illuminate and deepen discussion, and in most cases we will return to
dialogue or other forms of active learning to further digest content.
The use of laptops is strongly discouraged as there is ample evidence this harms learning [1, 2].
However, we will have a debate on the first day of class to determine the final policy.
Regardless, lecture slides will be made available on Canvas although hand-written notes are
encouraged to help with retention.
2

Recitation Session
Weekly recitations will be places for key dialogue across peers, discussing arguments and
positions on key issues, and working through class concepts. These sessions will be led by our
TAs with an occasional guest moderator. Most of the session will take place in breakout groups
that are having conversation in smaller units.
Recitations are counted for attendance and your weekly homework assignment will include a
reflection section that will build off the discussion prompts from recitation.
Course Requirements
Class Engagement (20% of grade): Class engagement points are broken up into 3
components outlined below:
1.
Attendance (10%) - Class attendance will be taken at each lecture and at each
recitation. Each lecture and recitation is worth a point. Students can miss up to 4 days
with no penalty (ie., we drop 4 points of the total before calculating your grade at the end
of semester). We do have a grace window for late arrivals without prior approval: for
class, being more than 30 mins late, counts as an absence, and for recitation
being more than 15 minutes late counts as an absence
2.
Discussion participation (5%) – throughout class time, there will be prompted discussion
and chances for Q&A. The entire class will also be asked to participate in small group
discussions or solo exercises, and to share perspectives from their small groups or
private work with the rest of the class. TAs will be tracking who has engaged in
discussion by contributing arguments, engaging with prompts, asking content relevant
questions (ie., “when is the assignment due?” does not count), and sharing insights. If
you are looking for a targeted metric, you should be shooting to have contributed to
class discussion at minimum, once per month.
a.
While we will quantitatively track in-class participation, this is a qualitative grade
meaning that to get the full points for this 10%, it will be based on the professor
and TAs seeing a real effort to attend class and engage in the course discussions
and activities.
3.
Weekly Reflections (5%)
a.
Each week we will give a short reflection assignment for homework. This will
involve a few questions related to readings and core concepts from the week as
well as a short reflection that can be submitted either as a write-up (max 2 pages)
or as a short video or audio recording (max 5 mins).
Major Assignments (50% of grade): Throughout the course, there will be five major
assignments that are each worth 10% of your final grade. The assignments directly relate to the
key skills and content the course seeks to cover, please see each assignment write-up on
Canvas.
3

As the largest part of your grade, the major assignment will carry a soft deadline and a hard
deadline. The soft deadline is a chance to submit your work either in part or in whole for grade
and feedback, yet you’ll have a chance to (re)submit at the hard deadline to improve your grade
or make up the work if you didn’t get it done earlier.
It is encouraged that you use the soft deadline as your target since that both allows you to pace
the course better and to get feedback. If you are happy with your grade, you can be done with
the assignment and have nothing to submit at the hard deadline! The hard deadlines are there
to recognize that students may have busy periods and need to balance workloads at different
times in the semester.
The soft deadlines are listed below alongside each assignment description. The hard deadline
for all major assignments is Sunday December 8, 2024 at 11:59PM. This deadline is inflexible
with no extensions due to the fact you have the soft deadline (and all the time in between) to
plan your work.
The 5 major assignments are as follows:
1.
Perspectives on Personal Values (due 9/15)
a.
This assignment asks you to reflect on your personal values and how they relate
to your behaviors and to technology. We will also ask that you interview someone
outside your major to discuss your values and compare perspectives on what the
value terminology means to different people.
2.
Position Paper (due 10/6)
a.
This assignment asks you to take a position on an ethical question related to
technology and engineering. You should give an overview of the ethical problem
you are focusing on, including definition of key terminology, you will then have to
make clear what side you take on the issue, and give an exposition of your
perspective using real examples, speculations, and counter-arguments to
potential critiques.
3.
Technical Analysis (due 10/27)
a.
This assignment will ask you to dive into the technical implementation of a piece
of hardware, software, app, or system to assess what technical choices were
made to create the technology, what the implications of those technical choices
are, and how they could be reconsidered to better align with social benefits
and/or ethical outcomes. Though you will not write code, you will be required to
think through specific technical practices and observable system behaviors
related to your analysis.
4.
Ethics Scenario/Story (due 11/10)
a.
This assignment asks you to write either a fictional short story or do a
presentation of a scenario that represents a real ethical dilemma faced by
practitioners in industry. The goal is to ensure you can develop and discuss how
specific scenarios of risks and harms that happen when people use technology
4

are structured by ethical dilemmas the technologists face when making design /
implementation decisions.
5.
Transforming Tech (due 11/24)
a.
This assignment has you thinking about the future and what it will take to change
the social impacts of technology for the better. You will have the opportunity to
look at this assignment through the lens of an innovator, policy-maker, or
advocate to consider goals, approaches to change, and road map how we may
achieve these outcomes.
Written Exam (20% of grade): The Midterm will be held in person on the Thursday after Fall
break (October 24). You will have the full class time (1 hour and 20 mins) to answer a few short
answer questions about core concepts covered in class and to do a long-form analysis of a
case, identifying questions, dilemmas, differing perspectives, and potential solutions.
Final Presentation (10% of final grade): The final presentation will involve you working with a
group (2-4 people) to develop a short presentation and corresponding visual aid. We will have a
class showcase time where students will have an opportunity to set up their visuals and present
to our TAs and members of the public who Prof. Skirpan will invite. During the presentation time,
“graders” will go around and stop at each team’s station to get a short presentation and
overview and ask questions. Groups will be graded based on clarity of presentation,
accessibility to the general public, and team communication dynamics.
●
We are waiting to coordinate when the poster session will be and will announce it to the
class (and put on Canvas) soon as we have it confirmed.
Course Objectives
This course is expected to introduce students to ethical thinking and writing as it relates to
technology and engineering. We will take a very applied approach to teaching ethics where our
goals will be more about supporting each student in adopting practical and reproducible mental
habits that allow you to go about your specialized work with an ethical lens or mindset. We will
also reinforce writing and communication skills such that each student is better prepared to both
speak and write about ethical concepts and frameworks in their discussion of technology and
engineering. The learning outcomes you can expect are:
1.
Increased communication skills in writing and speaking about ethics in the technology
and engineering context
2.
An improved awareness of current events related to technology ethics issues and
science and technology policy
3.
An improved awareness of differing perspectives around different ethical dilemmas and
issues
4.
Translational skills for converting ethical concepts into engineering examples, choices,
and practices, and vice versa.
5

5.
Ability to reason through and creatively interpret engineering problems and scenarios
using ethical frameworks and concepts
6.
Develop your own personal ethical standards around how you approach computing
issues within your future career.
On Tolerance and Respect
In this course students will be expected to engage in discussion about ethics, which is a
notoriously thorny and personal matter. Taking this course implies you are interested in
improving your comprehension and awareness of ethical issues in computing. Part of
developing a viewpoint and set of ethics is understanding the landscape of thought. In order to
tread this together and learn from one another, we must listen to each other and fundamentally
give one another respect and the benefit of the doubt.
It is anticipated that cultural viewpoints are going to be bound into how we each interpret this
material and so we expect that people will practice the art of careful listening. Students who feel
certain discussions may be challenging for them to hold in a group setting are welcome to join
the TAs in office hours as a replacement to group discussion. For particularly personal topics,
we are also open to scheduling separate small-group or individual discussions to offer a safe
space to work out your ideas.
Class Schedule
Please use the course Canvas for the most up to date information. A live course schedule,
based on what is currently planned, is available publicly here.
We may occasionally modify this schedule based on potential speaker availability. Updates to
the class plan, readings, or recitations will be posted to the linked schedule and Canvas.
DEI Statement
We must treat every individual with respect. We are diverse in many ways, and this diversity
is fundamental to building and maintaining an equitable and inclusive campus community.
Diversity can refer to multiple ways that we identify ourselves, including but not limited to race,
color, national origin, language, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion,
creed, ancestry, belief, veteran status, or genetic information. Each of these diverse identities,
along with many others not mentioned here, shape the perspectives our students, faculty, and
staff bring to our campus. We, at CMU, will work to promote diversity, equity and inclusion not
only because diversity fuels excellence and innovation, but because we want to pursue justice.
We acknowledge our imperfections while we also fully commit to the work, inside and outside of
our classrooms, of building and sustaining a campus community that increasingly embraces
these core values.
Each of us is responsible for creating a safer, more inclusive environment.
6

Unfortunately, incidents of bias or discrimination do occur, whether intentional or unintentional.
They contribute to creating an unwelcoming environment for individuals and groups at the
university. Therefore, the university encourages anyone who experiences or observes unfair or
hostile treatment on the basis of identity to speak out for justice and support, within the moment
of the incident or after the incident has passed. Anyone can share these experiences using the
following resources:
●
Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion: csdi@andrew.cmu.edu, (412) 268-2150
●
Report-It (Links to an external site.) online anonymous reporting platform:
reportit.net (Links to an external site.) username: tartans password: plaid
All reports will be documented and deliberated to determine if there should be any following
actions. Regardless of incident type, the university will use all shared experiences to transform
our campus climate to be more equitable and just.