1 
                                                                                                                       
Course Syllabus 
18-416/18-616/42637: Nano-Bio-Photonics 
Spring 2025 
 
 
Instructor: 
 
Maysam Chamanzar  
Office Location:   
REH 331 
Email Address:   
mchamanz@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  
Tuesday 11 AM-12 PM 
 
Teaching Assistant: Xiang Li 
Office Location:   
HH B-121 
Email Address: 
xli7@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  
TBD based on poll 
 
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html

 
2 
 
 
Course Description:  
 
Light can penetrate biological tissue non-invasively. Most of the available bio-optic tools are 
bulky. With the advent of novel nanotechnologies, building on-chip integrated photonic devices 
for applications such as sensing, imaging, neural stimulation, and monitoring is now a possibility. 
These devices can be embedded in portable electronic devices such as cell phones for point of care 
diagnostics. This course is designed to convey the concepts of nano-bio-photonics in a practical 
way to prepare students to engage in emerging photonic technologies. 
 
The course starts with a review of electrodynamics of light waves. The appropriate choice of 
wavelength and material platform is the next topic. Then optical waveguides and resonators are 
discussed. Resonance-based sensing is introduced followed by a discussion of the Figure of Merits 
(FOMs) used to design on-chip sensors. Silicon photonics is introduced as an example of a CMOS-
compatible platform. On-chip spectroscopy is the next topic. 
 
The second part covers nano-plasmonics for bio-detection and therapy. The design methods are 
discussed, followed by an overview of nanofabrication and chemical synthesis, and then a 
discussion of applications. 
 
The last part of this course will be dedicated to the application of optics in neuroscience. We will 
discuss concepts of neurophotonics, Methods such as Optogenetic neural stimulation, Calcium 
imaging and Cancer Imaging and Therapy and the state-of-the-art neurophotonic technologies for 
neuroscience will be discussed. 
 
 
 
Number of Units:  
12 
 
Pre-requisites:  
18-300, senior undergraduate or graduate standing 
 
Undergraduate Course Designation: Depth 
 
Undergraduate Course Area: Device Sciences and Nanofabrication 
 
Class Schedule: 
Lecture: 
Tuesday and Thursday 
9:30am-10:50 am 
 
 
 
Textbooks:  
 
Integrated Photonics, Authors: Clifford Pollock and Michal Lipson  
Springer Science & Business Media, 2013  
 
Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications, Stefan Alexander Maier  
Springer Science & Business Media, May 16, 2007 - Technology & Engineering  

 
3 
 
 
Other Supplemental Materials: Scientific Papers will be made available to students during 
class.  
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: Biophotonic sensors, Integrated photonics, Waveguides, 
Resonators, Nano-plasmonics, LSPR sensors, Raman Spectroscopy, SERS, Resonator-based 
sensors, Surface chemistry, Biosensing, Optogenetic stimulation of brain, lab-on-chip, point-of-
care diagnostics. Optogenetics, Calcium imaging, Neurophotonics, Numerical simulation of 
photonic waveguides, resonators, and plasmonic structures. 
 
Course Canvas:  
To access the course canvas from an Andrew Machine, go to the login page at: 
https://cmu.instructure.com/. You should check the course canvas daily for announcements and 
handouts.  
 
Course Wiki: 
Students are encouraged to use the ECE wiki to provide feedback about the course at: 
http://wiki.ece.cmu.edu/index.php. 
 
Assignments:  
Homework problem sets will need to be turned in on or before the due dates. Solutions will be 
graded by the teaching staff and some of the problems will be discussed in class. The numerical 
simulation part of homework is not required for the undergraduate level. 
 
 
Term Project:  
Projects will be assigned to groups of students (1-3 students each group). Students who have 
signed up for the graduate level are required to carry out a more in-depth project, whereas 
students in the undergraduate section are expected to carry out a survey-type project. The project 
has three phases: 
 
Phase I: During this phase, students will pick up their project topic, form the teams, and will lay 
out the plan for the project. 
 
Phase II: During this phase, students will perform literature survey, will perform initial analysis 
and modeling, and will prepare a progress report. 
 
Phase III: During this phase, students will complete their project, will write a comprehensive 
report and will give presentations in class. 
 
*The deliverables for each phase are due at the times indicated on course calendar. 
 
** Students are required to meet with Prof. Chamanzar or the teaching staff during 
office hours (or by appointment) before the due dates to discuss their projects. 
 

 
4 
 
 
 
 
Grading Algorithm:  
Different grading algorithms will be used for the graduate and the undergraduate levels. 
 
 
Graduate (18-616/42637) 
Undergraduate (18-416) 
 
20% Assignments  
25% Assignments  
 
35% Exam   
45% Exam   
 
5% Bonus credit  
5% Bonus credit  
 
45% Project  
30% Project 
 
The maximum possible grade for the graduate and undergraduate level is 105. While lower 
cutoffs may be used, the following maximum grade cutoffs are guaranteed: 
 
Final Score Grade  
> 90 A  
> 80 B  
> 70 C  
> 60 D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
Tentative Course Calendar:  
Date 
Day 
Class Activity 
Note 
January 
 
14 
Tues. 
Introduction: Why Nano-bio-photonics? Basic concepts and 
scales  
 
16 
Thurs. 
Review of Lightwaves: Maxwell’s equations, Wave equation, 
Boundary conditions for Dielectric Interfaces 
 
21 
Tues.  
Integrated photonic waveguides: concept, analysis and modeling 
of waveguides 
 
23 
Thurs. 
Dispersion and loss in optical waveguides 
 
28 
Tues. 
Waveguide devices 
 
30 
Thurs. 
Mach Zehnder interferometers 
HW1 
Feb 
 
 
4 
Tues 
Numerical simulation of WG modes 
Xiang 
6 
Thurs. 
Waveguide-based sensors 
 
11 
Tues. 
Fabrication and characterization of waveguides  
Projects Phase I 
13 
Thurs. 
Integrated photonic resonators 
 
18 
Tues. 
Whispering Gallery resonators 
HW2 
20 
Thurs. 
Resonance-based sensors: design, fabrication, and figures of 
merit, sensitivity, and detection limit 
 
25 
Tues. 
Sensor specificity: Surface chemistry  
Challenges of resonance-based sensors: Temperature drift, 
fabrication imperfections 
 
27 
Thurs. 
Plasmonics: elements of nano-optics 
 
March 
 
 
3-7 
Mon-
Fri 
Spring Break 
 
11 
Tues. 
Surface plasmon polaritons, SPR sensors 
 
13 
Thurs. 
Synthesis and fabrication of nanoplasmonic structures 
HW3 
18 
Tues. 
Applications in cancer therapy: Photothermal therapy 
 
20 
Thurs. 
Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) 
Projects Phase II 
25 
Tues. 
Neuro-photonics: new frontiers for brain interfacing 
 
27 
Thurs. 
Numerical simulations of micro-resonators 
Xiang 
April 
 
1 
Tues. 
Optogenetics: Method, challenges and opportunities 
HW4 
3 
Thurs. 
Spring Carnival – No Classes 
 
8 
Tues. 
Implantable active and passive neurophotonic devices: 
requirements, challenges and opportunities.  
Examples: fiber optics, implantable waveguide neural probes and 
uLEDs 
 
10 
Thurs. 
Imaging brain in action: functional optical imaging based on Ca 
and voltage-sensitive indicators) 
HW5 
15 
Tues. 
Miniscopes for endoscopic functional imaging 
 
17 
Thurs. 
2-photon and multi-photon neural imaging 
Hybrid optical modalities for neural interfacing 
HW6 
22 
Tues.  
Project presentations 
Xiang 
24 
Thurs. 
Project presentations 
Projects Phase III 
Take-home EXAM, 
Xiang 
 
 

 
6 
 
 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes): 
 
 
1. An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying 
principles of engineering, science, and mathematics: Permeates course through 
discussion of fundamentals and practical aspects of Nano-bio-photonics. 
Problems are posed in terms of real world object whenever possible. 
 
2. An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs 
with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, 
environmental, and economic factors: Examples of real world biosensors will be 
discussed in the class, through which students will gain insight into the design 
criteria, challenges, and limitations. 
 
3. An ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences: Course projects 
encompass interdisciplinary topics and foster teamwork among students. 
 
4. An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering 
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of engineering 
solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts. 
 
5. An ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, 
and meet objectives: Opportunity for performing a team project and presenting the 
projects and preparing lecture summaries. 
 
6. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret 
data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions: Some discussion of value of 
memorization of fundamental relationships versus use of analysis from first 
principles. Discussion of many application domains from subject. 
 
7. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning 
strategies.: Discussion of application of nano-photonics to many areas of 
contemporary technology is part of the course. 
 
 
ECE