1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-842/18-442: Autonomous Robotics 1  
Spring 2025 
 
 
Instructor: 
 
Ziad Youssfi  
Office Location:   
HH A202 
Email Address:    
zyoussfi@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  
TTh 1–2 pm, and F 10-11 am  
 
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html 
 
 
Course Description: This course combines machine learning and robotics in a hands-on 
approach that encourages discovery. The course will have three portions. First, students learn 
deep learning fundamentals, convolutional neural networks, and object detection. In the second 
portion, students learn the fundamentals of Robot Operating System 2 (ROS2). In the last portion, 
they learn how to implement ROS2 computational graphs and machine learning models on a 
hardware and software acceleration platform to achieve real-time robotic perception, cognition, 
and action. Students develop a miniature self-driving robot based on the Jetson Orin Nano 
platform and the RealSense camera for vision. Students are encouraged to discover their robotic 
application tasks. Prior machine learning or robotics knowledge is not required. However, strong 
C/Python programming skills, computer systems knowledge, and a sense of wonder are strongly 
preferred. 
 
Number of Units:  
12 
 
Pre-requisites:  
18213 or 15213 
 
Graduate Area:  
Software systems, signals & systems 
 
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: 
• Deep Learning Networks 
o Basic principles: regression, shallow networks, deep neural networks 
o Training and optimization techniques 
o Convolutional neural networks: image classification, object detection 
o Efficient neural networks:YOLO, etc. 
• Robot Operating System (ROS2) 
o 
Basic Concepts of ROS2: Packages, launch files, nodes, and client libraries 

 
2 
 
o 
Publishers and subscribers 
o 
Node composition and components in ROS2. 
o 
Services, clients, and servers 
o 
Executors, multithreading, and callbacks. 
o 
Debugging tools such as RVIZ2 
• 
AI vision and inferencing using the Intel RealSense camera. 
Labs & Projects:  
Since this pilot course is offered for the first time, students are expected to participate 
in creating fun and hands-on labs and projects.   
• Build and deploy ROS2 systems using Nvidia’s IsaacROS on the GPU-
accelerated Jetson Orin Nano platform. 
• Implement robot motion task with object localization and AprilTags. 
• Implementation of road following and object avoidance. 
• Open-ended and student-defined projects 
Grading Algorithm:  
Midterm Exam 1: 
15% 
Midterm Exam 2:  
15% 
Weekly Labs  
35% 
Project  
 
30% 
Contribution to class   5% 
Course Calendar:  
 
Find it online here 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
(1)  an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics: 
Course assignments and projects ask students to apply mathematical and 
engineering concepts to build small robots. These robots employ machine 
learning models, the Robot Operating System 2 (ROS), and software 
acceleration techniques to carry out specific tasks or solve specific problems. 
(5) an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, 
plan tasks, and meet objectives 
Students work together in teams of two or three members to implement 
different projects throughout the second half of the semester. Students' 
collaboration involves selecting a project idea, selecting different roles for the 
team members (leader, writer, communicator, etc.), and fairly dividing up the 
workload into modules that the different team members will carry out. 
(6) an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions 

 
3 
 
Student projects provide many opportunities to experiment with new robotic 
ideas and machine learning models and analyze the results from these 
experiments.  
(7) an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies. 
To carry out projects, students will have to develop and acquire new 
knowledge of different robotic perception, cognition, and action techniques.   
 
 
ECE