1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-453 Introduction to XR Systems 
Fall 2023 
Instructor: 
 
Anthony Rowe / Aswin Sankaranarayanan 
Office Location: 
CIC 2217, PH B24 
Email Address: 
{agr,saswin}@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
 
Course Description:  
Digitization of reality is at the cusp of widespread adoption; it also embodies a unique 
convergence of techniques that span the gamut of electrical and computer engineering. This 
course introduces students to augmented/virtual/mixed reality systems, or what is broadly 
referred to as extended reality (XR). The course covers hardware and software topics 
central to XR systems, namely, content capture, streaming, and display. The course also 
aims to make students comfortable with some of the basic tools required to digitize, 
optimize, render, control, and visualize content. 
 
In addition to lectures spanning the eco-system of topics central to XR systems, the course 
will feature labs where students will implement techniques to digitize 3D content using 
RGBD cameras, importing and manipulating digital content in modern XR development 
workflows, building controllers with 6 DOF, and finally building a 3D display. By the end 
of the course, all these components will be connected to complete the cycle between reality 
to digital reality and back.  
 
The course will have one project that will require implementing and demonstrating a 
feature on an XR display. The project will have multiple deliverables, including a mid-
semester presentation that will involve a deep dive into related technical articles. 
 
Course Goals: At the culmination of the course, the student should be able to understand 
of gamut of techniques underlying XR systems, including different flavors of XR systems 
that are in vogue. The course will provide hands-on experience in building different 
components of an XR system, and the ability to critically analyze the tradeoffs in each.  
 
Number of Units:  
12 
 
Pre-requisites:  
● 18-290 OR 18-213. 
 

 
2 
 
Course Area & Designation: Signals and Systems, Signal Processing and 
Communications; Computer Systems 
 
Class Schedule  
● Lecture  
     Tues,Thurs 11:00m – 12:20pm 
 ET     
  
● Recitation:  
     Friday 
11:00am – 12:20pm ET 
       
 
 
Required Textbook: None 
 
Suggested Reading: A wide range of reading material will be made available for each 
topic. 
 
Other Supplemental Materials: None 
 
Grading Algorithm:  
40% 
Labs 
20% 
HWs 
35% 
Final project  
5% 
Experience sessions 
 
Tentative Course Calendar:  
 
Week 1 
Introduction; Understanding the reality continuum 
Week 2 
Human perception 
Week 3 
Real-time rendering 
Week 4 
Display design  
Week 5 
Display design 
Week 6 
Localization 
Week 7 
Mid-semester presentation 
Week 8 
Reality capture 
Week 9 
Scene reconstruction 
Week 10 
Digitizing the human body 
Week 11 
Frontiers of XR 
Week 12 
Frontiers of XR 
Week 13 
Final project presentation 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your 
education.  ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all 
the courses you take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by this 
course and in what manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” 
through “7” in the standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course 
have been omitted from the following list: 

 
3 
 
 
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics: The course 
poses many problems in the form of labs and projects where the students tackle 
engineering problems in photogrammetry, real-time rendering, 3D display design, 
and user interfaces 
2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet 
specified needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as 
well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors: the 
course introduces students to concepts in XR systems, which are intricately tied to 
socio-cultural and economic factors. 
3. an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences: students get 
to practice their communication skills in a project presentation and demo 
4. an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering 
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of 
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal 
contexts: the course via projects gets students to think about the design of 
systems and components central to XR systems. students have the opportunity to 
consider the various factors that underlie design decisions, which involve social, 
cultural, economic and environmental constraints 
5. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions: through 
the use of labs and projects the course provides problems that involve an 
understanding of experimentation (including hands-on building) and the analysis 
of the data generated. 
6. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies: both in the project and the lab, students are given 
opportunities to learn by themselves using online resources as well as advice from 
TAs and instructors. 
 
How to succeed in this class. Attend lectures and recitations and ask lots of questions! 
Getting high scores in HWs is a necessary ingredient for doing well in this course. And 
HWs are best handled by asking lots of questions and clarifying your doubts in lectures, 
office hours and piazza.  
 
Take care of yourself. Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by 
eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some 
time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress. 
 
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are 
many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college 
experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is 
often helpful. 
 
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or 
feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. 
Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) is here to help: call 412-268-2922 and 

 
4 
 
visit their website at http://www.cmu.edu/counseling/. Consider reaching out to a friend, 
faculty or family member you trust for help getting connected to the support that can 
help. 
 
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call someone 
immediately, day or night: 
 
CaPS: 412-268-2922 
Re:solve Crisis Network: 888-796-8226 
 
If the situation is life threatening, call the police: 
On campus: CMU Police: 412-268-2323 
Off campus: 911 
 
If you have questions about this or your coursework, please let me know. 
 
We must treat every individual with respect. We are diverse in many ways, and this 
diversity is fundamental to building and maintaining an equitable and inclusive campus 
community. Diversity can refer to multiple ways that we identify ourselves, including but 
not limited to race, color, national origin, language, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, 
gender identity, religion, creed, ancestry, belief, veteran status, or genetic information. 
Each of these diverse identities, along with many others not mentioned here, shape the 
perspectives our students, faculty, and staff bring to our campus. We, at CMU, will work 
to promote diversity, equity and inclusion not only because diversity fuels excellence and 
innovation, but because we want to pursue justice. We acknowledge our imperfections 
while we also fully commit to the work, inside and outside of our classrooms, of building 
and sustaining a campus community that increasingly embraces these core values. 
 
Each of us is responsible for creating a safer, more inclusive environment. 
 
Unfortunately, incidents of bias or discrimination do occur, whether intentional or 
unintentional. They contribute to creating an unwelcoming environment for individuals 
and groups at the university. Therefore, the university encourages anyone who experiences 
or observes unfair or hostile treatment on the basis of identity to speak out for justice and 
support, within the moment of the incident or after the incident has passed. Anyone can 
share these experiences using the following resources: 
● Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion: csdi@andrew.cmu.edu, (412) 268-2150 
● Report-It online anonymous reporting platform: reportit.net 
       username: tartans password: plaid 
All reports will be documented and deliberated to determine if there should be any 
following actions. Regardless of incident type, the university will use all shared 
experiences to transform our campus climate to be more equitable and just. 
 
 
ECE