1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18461/661: Introduction to Machine Learning for Engineers   
Fall 2024 
 
 
Instructor: Soummya Kar  
Office Location: PH B30  
Email Address: soummyak@andrew.cmu.edu  
Office Hours: Mondays, 3 – 4 pm, PH B30  
 
 
 
Instructor: Andrea Zanette  
Office Location: TBD  
Email Address: azanette@andrew.cmu.edu  
Office Hours: TBD  
 
Teaching Assistants:  
(Partial list, to be updated later. Please refer to the course Piazza for information on TA 
office hours.) 
 
Mehal Agarwal mehala@andrew.cmu.edu  
Hanshi Sun hanshis@andrew.cmu.edu  
Jiin Woo jiinw@andrew.cmu.edu  
Shashwat Chawla shashwac@andrew.cmu.edu 
Anvesha Katariyar aakatari@andrew.cmu.edu 
Pharuj Rajborirug prajbori@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html 
 
 
Course Description: This course provides an introduction to machine learning with a 
special focus on engineering applications. The course starts with a mathematical 
background required for machine learning and covers approaches for supervised learning 
(linear models, kernel methods, decision trees, neural networks) and unsupervised 
learning (clustering, dimensionality reduction), as well as theoretical foundations of 
machine learning (learning theory, optimization). Evaluation will consist of mathematical 
problem sets and programming projects targeting real-world engineering applications. 
 

 
2 
 
 
Number of Units: 12 
 
Pre-requisites: 18202, 21127, 36217, 15122, or equivalent  
 
Graduate Area:  Signals and Systems 
 
Undergraduate Course Designation: Coverage  
Undergraduate Course Area: Signals and Systems 
 
 
Class Schedule:  
 
● Lecture  
Pittsburgh: Monday and Wednesday, 12:30pm-1:50pm ET, BH A36     
Silicon Valley: Monday and Wednesday, 9:30am-10:50am PT, B23 212 
Rwanda: Monday and Wednesday, 7:30pm-8:50pm CAT, CMU Remote  
● Recitation  
Pittsburgh: Friday, 11:00am-12:20pm ET, BH A36 
Silicon Valley: Friday, 8:00am-9:20am PT, B23 118 
Rwanda: Friday,, 5pm-6:20pm CAT, CMU Remote  
 
 
Recitation attendance is not required.  
 
 
Required Textbook: None 
 
Suggested Reading: Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective, Kevin Murphy. 1st 
edition. ISBN-13: 978-0262018029 
 
Other Supplemental Materials: See course website (https://18661.github.io/). We will 
maintain a Piazza for the course that can be accessed through Canvas (see instructions 
below). 
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: Supervised learning techniques (linear and logistic 
regression, support vector machines, naive Bayes, nearest neighbors, decision trees, 
neural networks), unsupervised learning techniques (clustering, expectation 
maximization, dimensionality reduction), fundamentals of learning theory (optimization, 
risk). Time permitting, advanced topics like graphical models and reinforcement learning. 
 
Course Canvas:  
Canvas login page: https://cmu.instructure.com/. You should check the course Canvas 
daily for announcements and handouts.  
 
Course Website: https://18661.github.io/ 
 
 

 
3 
 
Grading Algorithm:  
 
 
There will be seven homework assignments, of which your highest six scores will be 
given equal weight in calculating your homework grade, i.e., we will drop your lowest 
homework assignment score. Additionally, you will be given 5 “late days” that may be 
used at your discretion for self-granted 24-hour extensions to the assignment deadlines. 
At most two late days can be used per assignment. Opportunities for extra credit points, 
e.g., through answering extra homework questions, may be offered at the instructor’s 
discretion at various points in the course.  
 
The default method of assigning letter grades follows the standard grading scale (above 
90% A or A-; 80 – 89% B+, B, or B-; 70 – 79% C+, C, or C-; 60 – 69% D+, D, or D-; 
and below 60% F). We may curve up grades at the end of the course, depending on the 
outcome. Additionally, in borderline scenarios, we may adjust grades, particularly for 
students who consistently engage with the course (attend and ask questions in lectures, 
recitations, office hours, frequently help answer questions on Piazza, etc.). 
 
Collaboration Policy: The homeworks are structured to give you experience in both 
written mathematical exercises and programming exercises. While it is completely 
acceptable for you to collaborate with other students in order to solve the problems, your 
solution writeups should reflect your own understanding of the material. Thus, you 
should write up your own solutions and implement your own code. You must indicate on 
each homework the students with whom you collaborated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4 
 
Tentative Course Calendar: This calendar is subject to change. Please refer to the 
course website (https://18661.github.io/) for an updated and detailed calendar. 
 
Date 
Day 
Class Activity 
Assignment 
Due Date 
August 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
Mon. 
Introduction and Preliminaries 
 
 
28 
Wed. 
MLE/MAP, Linear Algebra Review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Mon. 
Labor Day – No Class 
 
 
4 
Wed. 
Linear Regression, part I 
 
 
9 
Mon. 
Linear Regression, part II 
 
 
11 
Wed.  Overfitting, Bias/variance Trade-off, Evaluation 
 
 
16 
Mon. 
Naive Bayes 
 
 
18 
Wed. 
Logistic Regression 
 
 
23 
Mon. 
Multi-class Classification 
 
 
25 
Wed. 
SVM, part I 
 
 
30 
Mon. 
SVM, part II 
 
 
October 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Wed. 
Nearest Neighbors 
  
  
7 
Mon. 
Decision Trees 
 
 
9 
Wed. 
Boosting, random forests 
 
 
14-18 
Mon-
Fri 
Fall Break – No Classes 
 
 
21 
Mon. 
Neural Networks, Part I 
 
 
23 
Wed. 
Midterm 
 
 
28 
Mon.  Neural Networks, Part II 
 
 
30 
Wed. 
Neural Networks, Part III 
 
 
November 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Mon. 
Clustering, Part I 
 
 
5 
Tues. 
Democracy Day – No Classes 
 
 
6 
Wed. 
Guest Lecture (TBD) 
 
 
11 
Mon. 
Clustering, Part II 
 
 
13 
Wed. 
EM 
 
 
18 
Mon. 
Dimensionality Reduction 
 
 
20 
Wed. 
Online Learning (Bandits) 
 
 
25 
Mon. 
Reinforcement Learning, part I 
 
 
27-29 
Wed-
Fri 
Thanksgiving – No Classes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
2 
Mon. 
Reinforcement Learning, part II 
 
 
4 
Wed. 
Advanced Topics (TBD) 
 
 
9-13 
Mon-
Fri 
Final Exams Week 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your 
education.  ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of 
all the courses you take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 
this course and in what manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” 
through “7” in the standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course 
have been omitted from the following list: 
 
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics 
2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified 
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, 
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors 
3. an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences 
4. an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering 
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of 
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts 
5. an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan 
tasks, and meet objectives 
6. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions 
7. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies. 
 
ECE