Course Syllabus
18-469/669: Hacker Fab
Fall 2024
Instructor:
Tathagata Srimani
Office Location: HH2124
Email Address: tsrimani@andrew.cmu.edu
Office Hours: MW - 6-7 PM
Instructor:
Matt Moneck
Office Location: SCOT 4S407
Email Address: mmoneck@andrew.cmu.edu
Office Hours: TR - 5-6 PM
TAs/RAs (AndrewIDs):
●
Joel Gonzalez (bgonzale)
●
Jay Kunselman (jskunsel)
●
David Hershenson (dhershen)
●
Kent Wirant (jwirant)
●
Yanbing Icey Chen (yanbing2)
●
Kaiyuan Liu (kaiyuan2)
●
Shashank Obla (sobla)
●
Jessica Wu (jwu5)
●
Joshna Iyengar (jiyengar)
●
Anirud Vineet Durani (adurani)
●
Akshunna Vaishnav (avaishna)
●
Erika Ramirez (erikaram)
Office Location: REH 202/204 (Hacker Fab Lab)
Office Hours: 5-7PM, Monday/Tuesday/Wednesday/Thursday or by appointment
(reach out to specific TA/RA)
Course Support: Academic Services Center
Office Location: HH 1113
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html

Course Description:
This course introduces students to fabrication of microelectronics by working on a
hands-on, collaborative, open source project: the Hacker Fab. Topics include layer
deposition, patterning, oxidation, etching, doping, inspection, metrology,
dynamics/motion control, vacuum, optics, material selection, and plasmas. Students
spend the majority of the class working together to design new fab tools, processes, and
microelectronic devices all the way from idea to implementation in order to expand the
capabilities of the Hacker Fab. Seven labs in the first half of the semester familiarize
students with equipment and culminate in all students making transistors. Lectures serve
to bridge the gap between the theoretical understanding gained from textbook readings
and the practical understanding from lab assignments. Lecture times are also for sharing
progress and coordinating efforts.
Number of Units:
12
Pre-requisites: None
Class Lecture:
7:00 - 8:50 PM, Monday and Wednesday, SH 238
Required Textbooks:
Microchip Fabrication, Peter Van Zant, 6th edition
Integrated Circuit Fabrication, Plummer and Griffin
Suggested Reading:
Building Scientific Apparatus, John H Moore
For fun illustrations: The Way Things Work Now, David Macaulay
Reference Materials:
Sam Zeloof’s YouTube Channel
Open Source Software vs. Hardware
Essays about Linux and Open Source
https://pseudodudo.com/research
Brief List of Topics Covered:
Layer deposition, patterning, oxidation, etching, doping, inspection, metrology,
dynamics/motion control, vacuum, optics, material selection, and plasma.
Course Canvas:
Canvas login page: https://cmu.instructure.com/. You should check the course Canvas
daily for announcements, grades, and feedback.

Time Commitments
1. 2 lectures per week, 1 hour 50 minutes each. Total 4 hours.
2. 1 asynchronous lab per week, about 3 hours. First half of semester only.
3. 1 scheduled project work session, about 2 hours, does not include individual work
outside of scheduled time. Increases in the second half of the semester.
Reading Assignments:
These readings are required. Semiconductor fabrication has been in existence for half a
century, which means people have had time to write good textbooks about it. They did a
better job of presenting this information than we can. The readings are selected to teach
the impact of each knob in our process, avoiding extraneous topics. Lectures will bridge
the textbook theory to the practical labs. See the calendar below for the readings.
Grading Scheme:
7 Labs - 25%
14 Written Updates - 50%
3 Group Presentations - 25%

Projects
Building and operating a semiconductor fab is an incredibly rich educational experience
for students in many disciplines. Students will work solo or in teams to accomplish goals
like building a new tool from scratch or developing a new process. Instructors will help
by breaking down technical goals into manageable chunks and assigning them to students
in accordance with their interests and abilities. Projects are decided before each semester
begins. For Fall 2024, there are many projects running in parallel:
●
Create deposition tools that go beyond the current capabilities of our DIY thermal
evaporator
○
Design and build a DIY atomic layer deposition tool
○
Design and build a DIY sputtering tool
●
Continue development of our DIY photolithography stepper
○
Develop computer vision alignment of photolithography patterning
○
Test and integrate a DIY piezoelectric nanopositioner for precise movement
○
Test and integrate a DIY laser interferometer for feedback control
●
Create automated tools for the lab to make our processes more consistent
○
Lab robot to automate the lab’s wet chemical handling
■
Gantry system to move chips between machines
■
Liquid handling
■
Gripping mechanism
■
Photoresist baking
○
DIY Spin Coater V2
○
DIY novel furnace design for thermal diffusion in a small form factor
●
Develop new processes for fabricating transistors - NMOS, CMOS, and beyond
●
Lower the barrier to entry by creating a new process
○
Design fabrication processes that remove all harmful chemical use
■
Remove the use of hydrofluoric acid
■
Find an alternative to photoresist
■
Find an alternative to spin on glass
○
Create our own gate stack to remove dependency on the semiconductor industry
■
Grow our own oxides
■
Deposit a non-poly gate
○
Develop an electroplating process + apparatus to remove the need for a thermal
evaporator
●
Further develop metrology tools for the lab
○
Create a DIY electrical testing setup via DIY probe station and
source-measurement unit (SMU)
○
Develop a database for automated sensor data collection and analysis
Project teams will need to schedule times to build equipment or run experiments. The
people, places, and times may change throughout the semester as projects start and finish,
but there will always be a weekly core meeting for each project listed above to plan work.
Students are expected to come to the lab outside of scheduled times to complete tasks as
needed.

Weekly Progress Updates
The Hacker Fab is an open source project - others must be able to replicate students’
work, and every student is expected to create high quality documentation. Students will
be graded on their contributions to this documentation, and given feedback. The goal of
this is to directly link the performance of the students in 18-469/669 with the acceleration
of the Hacker Fab.
To facilitate grading, students will post short weekly summaries of their progress on
Canvas by Thursday night at midnight. These submissions will be graded from 0-5 on
Friday with written feedback.
One paragraph response to each:
1. What did you accomplish this week? This does not just mean group progress, but
specific contributions you made and how it links to the group’s work. “I helped X
with Y” will receive a bad grade. Links or screenshots to documentation, CAD,
schematics, process data, or working documents are also valued much more than
just a written summary.
2. What are you stuck on, if anything? Do you need help from anyone inside or
outside the class?
3. What are your plans for next week? If you don’t have a clear path, give options.
Use the project management page (github) for reference on tasks that need to be
completed.
The rubric is as follows:
5 points: Your work for the week directly contributed to the Hacker Fab goals, and the
documentation is detailed enough for someone else to easily recreate your work.
4 points: You worked towards a contribution to the Hacker Fab goals, though the
documentation for your work is not relevant enough to be included in the final Hacker
Fab documentation.
3 points: Your work for the week was related to the Hacker Fab goals, but isn't working
towards a direct contribution.
2 points: You wrote something.
0 points: You didn’t write anything.

Demos
Three times during the semester, each student will present to the rest of the class
and potential outside guests. The demo takes two forms: a demonstration of a working
machine or part of a machine, and a slide deck to be pasted in the lecture slides. The
presentation should demonstrate the relevance of the work to larger Hacker Fab goals.
These are group assignments, so if students worked together on a project, then
they should present together, with each student only presenting their own work. However,
students may also present alone if they desire, as long as their individual work includes a
functional physical demo (see rubric below). These will be graded individually based on
the progress made and how well it is presented. Students should reach out to course staff
if they have any questions about the content, format, scheduling, or anything else about
the presentations.
The schedule for demos can be found on the Tentative Course Calendar in this
syllabus. Demos will take place during regular lecture time, and they may be split over
two days to accommodate the number of students presenting that week. If you can bring
the demo over to our classroom in Scaife Hall, that is ideal; otherwise, we will bring the
class to REH 202/204.
The rubric is as follows (20 points total):
Working Demo - 10 Points
Half of your demo credit is related to if you have a physically working demo.
Points are not given for a pile of separate components, not literature
review, not CAD, not plans for next week’s work.
For process development demos: a clean sample of a new process on a
chip is a great demonstration. Put it under the microscope for other
students to play with.
Presentation - 10 Points
10 points: Your work directly contributed to the Hacker Fab goals, and you
presented your work clearly enough that anyone listening would have a complete
understanding of what you did. And your presentation gave people energy!
9 points: You worked towards a contribution to the Hacker Fab goals. You
presented your work clearly enough that most people listening would have a
complete understanding of what you did.
8 points: Your work was related to the Hacker Fab goals, but isn't working
towards a direct contribution. You presented your work clearly enough that some
people listening would have a complete understanding of what you did.

Video Demonstration - 5 Bonus Points
If you create a video that clearly showcases your working demo, you will receive
5 bonus points. This does not have to be extremely high production value, but
should include at minimum:
●
Multiple clips edited together
●
Show details that are not immediately apparent in the short demo you
made to the class
●
For process development demos: you can make a video detailing the
timeline of discovering and testing your new technique. This should
provide more information so that viewers know what you already
debugged, and it puts the process in context against alternatives.
Labs
The labs are designed to familiarize students with the equipment in the Hacker
Fab and impart a physical understanding of fabrication processes. These labs are not a
large portion of the class, and serve to aid students’ understanding for their individual
projects. Later labs will build off of previous ones so that students end up with
functioning NMOS transistors.
Process control is extremely important to fabricate good devices, but doing so in
practice is difficult. Students will experience defects and failures throughout fabrication,
and the lab reports encourage the analysis of these outcomes rather than being entirely
based on results.
Labs are conducted in a group setting. At the beginning of the semester, students
will be assigned a three-hour lab session based on their availability. Students will use this
weekly lab session to complete the labs under the guidance of the TAs. Students should
communicate with the course staff if they need to miss their scheduled lab session, so that
they may join another session to make up the work.
The deliverables for each lab include:
1. The data and analysis sections, to be graded for completion.
2. Report questions.
The following is a list of all the labs and some important goals for each. It is subject to
slight modifications in order to fit class requirements.

1. Patterning
Patterning is the core of all microelectronic fabrication process flows. This is the
first lab because Stepper V2 is one of the projects for the semester and we want to give
context for that work by using V1. It will also provide practice for future patterning steps.
Students will cleave, spin coat, bake, pattern, develop and inspect their chips in
series. Individual lab report questions will test the understanding of photolithography
performance and the resolution limits on the stepper.
2. Spin on Glass + Dope
This lab marks the beginning of the transistor fabrication sequence. Spin on glass
is the first step in our MOSFET fabrication sequence in order to dope the polysilicon gate
and achieve the electrical characteristics we desire. Students will spin on a doped glass
layer, anneal it, analyze the success of that procedure, then diffuse the dopant into the top
layer of polysilicon and analyze again. Proper spin coating technique will be critical to
avoid glass defects.
Thickness can be estimated from color (maybe with a spectrometer) and defects
include striations, cracks, and pinholes. Students will have to judge whether a defect is
bad enough to require restarting the process.
The single chip that students start in this lab will be used in every future lab until
every process step is complete and what is left on the chip are transistors.
Wet etch will be done in batches due to time constraints and student HF safety
training bottlenecks.

3. Plasma Etch + SOG
Taking turns, students will pattern their own gates on new chips, then use the
plasma etcher to etch polysilicon. Report questions will focus on finding defects in the
gate photoresist pattern and seeing how they transfer to the etched layer. Additional
metrology options include profilometry.
After the polysilicon is etched, the students will spin on undoped glass in
preparation for the next lab. Proper spin coating technique will be critical to avoid glass
defects. Report questions will focus on success of the reactive ion etch and
characterization of defects during glass application.
4. Wet Etch + Spin on Dopant + Dopant Diffusion
Students will pattern the active (doped) region on the glass they spun on the
previous lab, oxide etch, then spin on doped glass and diffuse.
This is the first lab that students will have to practice vertical alignment during
patterning (aligning the new active region pattern with the previous polysilicon gate
pattern). This is more complex than the open-loop patterning process done in previous
steps.
Thickness can be estimated from color (maybe with a spectrometer) and defects
include striations, cracks, and pinholes.
Students will pattern and etch the active areas with hydrofluoric acid.
Undercutting is a common unsolved problem to be aware of during this step.
Students will also spin on the next layer of doped glass and anneal it in
preparation for the next lab. Diffusion itself is relatively straightforward, but it has a large
impact on the operation of the final device. The ideal diffusion leads to ohmic contacts at
the source and drain while not leaking through the gate or diffusion barrier.

5. Wet Etch, Thermal Evaporation
After diffusion, students will pattern contact holes, wet etch oxide, properly strip
resist, clean, dehydrate, and load their chips into the evaporator. Evaporation will be done
in batches due to time constraints, so instructors will complete this step.
Proper cleaning to achieve ohmic contact between aluminum and doped silicon is
a sensitive and necessary step. The lab and report will focus on this heavily.
6. Aluminum Etch, Electrical Characterization
During lab 5 students will pattern and etch the aluminum layer that was just
deposited during evaporation, creating the top layer of wiring and contact pads. If
delamination occurs, students will need to re-evaporate.
After the last layer of aluminum is evaporated onto the chip, it is deposited
everywhere and must be etched in order to isolate wires and contacts.
This is also the final lab where students probe and measure the electrical
properties of their devices. The measurements include IV curves of the diffusion region
(to determine if ohmic contacts were created), CV curves of the gate, and IV curves with
stepped gate voltage for classic MOSFET operation. The lab report will emphasize
analysis connecting process data to resulting electrical characteristics.
This is the most substantial report of all the labs, and requires a review and
analysis of the processes that occurred leading up to the testing of these final transistors.
7. Makeup
Students have the opportunity to make up any process steps that went wrong
along the way, and continue their electrical characterization report.

Lectures
The lectures in this class are multipurpose. The primary uses of this time together are
listed below, in order of frequency. The semester will start with more instruction, but as
students delve into their projects, progress presentations will start to take up more lecture
time. The agenda for each lecture will be the second slide. Students are welcome to add
slides at any time if they want to share anything with the class.
●
Instruction
For the first seven weeks, lectures start with one hour of instruction connecting textbook
content to the labs, covering each fabrication process in detail. This includes explanation
of the physical phenomena occurring and the parameters that determine the outcomes,
discussion of the design and operation of the instruments for that process, and comparing
variations of equipment in terms of precision, throughput, safety, and cost. These lectures
may be given by guest lecturers from ECE faculty.
●
Lab Debrief
After the instructors and TAs have had a chance to review the students’ lab results, the
data will be aggregated and analyzed together as a class. The goal for these sessions is to
narrow down process control and yield.
●
Project Presentations / Demos
See section: Projects > Demos
●
Breakout Sessions
If project teams would benefit from additional time working together, the lecture hall can
be split into groups working separately. Since everyone is in the same room it becomes
easier to deal with interdependencies between teams, and if anyone is working in multiple
teams they can easily switch as needed.
●
Guest Lectures
From CMU faculty or industry experts on relevant topics, including the current
semiconductor industry, advanced devices, novel fabrication techniques, and data
management.
●
Lab Brief
If needed, next week’s lab can be reviewed in order to prepare students.

Tentative Course Calendar
Date
Day
Reading Due
Lecture Topic
Lab Topic
August
26
M
PVZ ch 4 (fab
overview)
+ Filling in the
Gaps Doc
Course + Project overview, semiconductor devices
(end goal). Introduce Hacker Fab process. EHS
lecture on lab safety.
28
W
PVZ ch 8
(patterning),
ch 9 up to etch
(develop +
bake)
Patterning overview, mask/maskless. Introduce the
patterning lab. Mechanical and optical resolution,
optical tricks.
September
2
M
Labor Day - No Classes
Patterning
4
W
PVZ ch 5
(Contam
Control, skip
cleanroom
design)
Plummer
11.3.2
Steppers, scanners, EUV machine case studies.
Electron beam writers. Stiffness and weight in
machine design. Optical design: refractive limits,
numerical aperture, reflective optics. Alignment
tolerances, critical dimensions.
9
M
Plummer 9.1
to 9.5.3
(plasma etch)
PVZ ch 9
Overertch and
Undercutting
Etching. Dry vs wet. How to make a plasma. Etch
rate factors. Selectivity. Isotropy. N2 purge safety.
How MOSFETs work and how to draw them.
Spin on glass parameters: speed, annealing temp
and time. Show pictures of previous tests, analyze
common defects and hypothesize failure modes.
Layout ideas for lab 2.
Spin on
Glass +
Doping
11
W
PVZ Ch 7 up
to p 167
PVZ ch 11 up
to 338
Doping - diffusion, ion implantation. Thermal
budget. Dopant profiles and effect on junction
properties. Dopant sources for diffusion - solid,
liquid, gas.
16
M
PVZ ch 13
Deposition
Methods
Overview of layer deposition techniques: oxidation,
physical vapor deposition, chemical vapor
deposition, unorthodox. Electroplating
Plasma
Etch +
SOG
18
W
A Sense of Scale Lecture (+ Vacuum systems.
Molecular flow regime. Material outgassing.
Vacuum gauges, flow meters/control)
23
M
Metrology: Microscopes, SEM, AFM, ellipsometry,
profilometers, spectroscopy. Connect use cases of
each with our fab, and break down tool into its
components to discuss DIY designs. Discuss in-situ
sensor design for automation + data collection.
Wet Etch
+ Spin on
Dopant +
Dopant
Diffusion
25
W
Work Day
15
M
Work Day
Wet Etch
+ Thermal
Evaporatio
n
October
2
W
IV and CV curve tracing. Four point probe,
resistivity measurements. Metal - semiconductor
contact properties. Connecting electrical

characteristics to process steps
7
M
Checkpoint 1 Demos
Aluminum
Etch +
Electrical
Characteri
zation
9
W
Checkpoint 1 Demos
14
M
Fall Break – No Classes
16
W
Fall Break – No Classes
21
M
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
Make Ups
23
W
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
28
M
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
30
W
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
4
M
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
6
W
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
11
M
Checkpoint 2 Demos
13
W
Checkpoint 2 Demos
18
M
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
20
W
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
25
M
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
27
W
Thanksgiving – No Classes
December
2
M
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
4
W
Work Days or Guest/Topical Lectures as needed
9
M
Finals Week - Public Demo Day

Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes)
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education. 
ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the
courses you take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by this
course and in what manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1”
through “7” in the standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course
have been omitted from the following list:
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics
a.
This course asks students to implement an extremely broad range of
engineering topics included in the semiconductor fabrication industry:
mechanical, electrical, material, and software engineering.
2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global,
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors
a.
There are specific technical requirements for each project in this course
that students must not only adhere to, but also document their findings in
order to share with the public. This practice of open documentation
directly supports the need for semiconductor workforce education by
lowering the barrier to entry for others outside of the course to understand
these complex concepts.
3. an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences
a.
Beyond working amongst other students in the class to complete
collaborative projects, the entire class focuses on pushing the open-source
Hacker Fab project forward. Documentation created by students is for
audiences ranging from other high end academic institutions, the
semiconductor fabrication industry, community colleges, and the general
public.
4. an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts
a.
From day one till the end of the class, students think of solutions to lower
the barrier to entry of semiconductor fabrication.
5. an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan
tasks, and meet objectives
a.
Students work in groups of 2-4 people in order to tackle projects all the
way from ideation to implementation.
6. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions
a.
Laboratory exercises provide for the opportunity to conduct experiments.
Students will design experiments and analyze data with a wide range of
metrology tools.
7. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate
learning strategies.
a.
During intermittent design reviews and demos, students will do extensive
literature review to determine what is worth working on, and what to
change going forward. The course and project structure is conducive to
fast moving and iteration of projects that require new knowledge.

ECE