forming of teams. The class will then be divided into multi-disciplinary teams of three to
five students. During the first half of the class, lab assignments will be made every 1-2
weeks to construct useful subsystems based on material learned in lecture. The lab
assignments are geared to build to the main project, which will be the sole focus of
roughly the second half of the course.
Number of Units:
12
Pre-requisites:
For ECE undergraduate students: ((18-348 or 18-349) and (18-320
or 15-313 or 18-370)) or (18-320 and 18-370). For undergraduate
Mechanical Engineering students: Senior design or equivalent.
CMU students (excluding undergraduate ECEs and MEs) may take
the course upon slot availability with permission of the instructors.
Undergraduate Course Designation: Coverage, Depth, Capstone Design
Undergraduate Course Area: Signals & Systems
Class Schedule:
●
Class time: MW, 12:00pm-01:50pm
●
Classroom for lectures, talks: Wean 4623
●
Lab, Team Meetings: TechSpark highbay and Design Studio
Required Textbook: None
Related Textbooks:
●
J. Edward Carryer, M. Ohline, and T. Kenny, Introduction to Mechatronic Design,
1st Edition, Pearson, 2010
●
P. Horowitz and W. Hill, The Art of Electronics, 2nd Ed., Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, 1989
●
Gordon McComb and Earl Boysen, Electronics for Dummies, Wiley Publishing,
Inc., Hoboken, NJ, 2005.
Brief List of Topics Covered: Electromechanical Design, Microcontrollers, Sensors,
Actuators, Systems Engineering
Course Canvas:
You should check the course Canvas for announcements and handouts.
You should use the Discussion module on Canvas for daily communication and
class-related discussion this term. We encourage you to ask questions when you're
struggling to understand a concept—you can even do so anonymously.
2

Course Assignments and Grading:
Because this is a Project Design Course, grading is based on your ability to
-
function on a multidisciplinary team
-
apply your accumulated knowledge within your discipline (Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Computer Science, Mechanical Engineering, or Robotics)
-
design your system under real constraints of time and overall cost
-
be proactive in designing, planning and implementing a successful project
-
identify issues, propose solutions, and iterate as problems arise
-
apply engineering tools and methodologies for project completion
-
communicate thoroughly, clearly and concisely in demonstrations, presentations
and reports
Assessment of these metrics occurs through a series of assignments (“tasks”). Tasks
include the design proposal, a mid-semester design presentation, a final comprehensive
report, weekly subsystem demonstrations in the first half of the semester and weekly
incremental demonstrations of the full system under development in the second half of
the semester. At the end of the semester, teams give a public demonstration of their final
project. This task is graded on presentation values.
Subsystems and systems for each team naturally differ, since they depend on the specific
design of the team. Therefore, basic tasks likely to be relevant for all teams are given for
the two initial lab assignments in the first half of the semester. Each team must identify
how to best incorporate the task into their project, or can petition to perform some equally
challenging task. Goals for subsystem demonstrations thereafter are set by each team,
with feedback and approval by the instructors.
All lab demonstrations except the final one (hereafter “system demos”) are 15 min. long
and comprise a short (5-7 min.) presentation of progress to the instructors by one of the
team members, with remaining time spent in discussion with the entire team. Team
members rotate each week in taking a turn at presenting. All team members are expected
to attend their team’s demonstrations; students who miss demonstrations without having
arranged ahead of time with the instructors to do so for a valid reason receive a zero for
the lab. Only one excused lab demonstration absence per semester is allowed. The
lowest score for the system demos is dropped from total grading to make up for a possible
bad day.
Each system demo is accompanied by an Individual Lab Report (ILR), generated by each
individual team member. The ILR should be 1 to 2 pages of 12-point text, 1” margins,
with at least one figure, but with no limit on figures. The ILR provides the individual’s
progress, challenges/issues, and plans, and cross-references work and interactions with
teammates. Documentation includes system functionality, technical understanding of
issues, and tangible progress on system implementation, with emphasis on your
individual contributions. Teams are encouraged to coordinate content for their ILRs, but
the writing must be done by each individual. Students must post ILRs electronically to
3

Canvas by 11:59 p.m. CMU Canvas time on the day after the system demo, with a
1-point penalty for late submissions within 12 hours and zero credit after that. Upon
submission, place the ILR in the Documents section of your team’s website for later
reference by all team members.
TASK
POINTS
DESCRIPTION
0 Teaming info spreadsheet
0
Background info to facilitate
team-forming
1 Design proposal
10
Concept, specifications, and
milestones
2 Sensing demo
10
Three sensor types coupled with the
motor control (ILR01)
3 DC, stepper, RC motor
control demo
10
Microcontrolled DC, stepper, and
RC servomotor (ILR02)
4 First system demo
10
First system/subsystems
demonstration (ILR03)
18.1 Website check 1
6
First website check
5 Second system demo
10
Second system/subsystems
demonstration (ILR04)
6 Third system demo
10
Third system/subsystems
demonstration (ILR05)
7 Mid-semester presentation
20
Presentation of design and issues
with prototype subsystems to date
8 Peer evaluation #1
15
Anonymous peer evaluation by
teammates
9 Fourth system demo
10
Fourth system/subsystems
demonstration (ILR06)
18.2 Website check 2
6
Second website check
10 Fifth system demo
10
Fifth system/subsystems
demonstration (ILR07)
11 Sixth system demo
10
Sixth system/subsystems
demonstration (ILR08)
12 Seventh system demo
10
Seventh system/subsystems
demonstration (ILR09)
13 Final system demo
20
Final full system demonstration
14 Final system demo encore
20
Final full system demonstration
encore
15 Public demonstration
10
Public project description and
demonstration
16 Final report
20
Comprehensive final report
17 Peer evaluation #2
15
Anonymous peer evaluation by
teammates
4

18.3 Website check 3
8
Third website check
19 Lab clean-up
10
Clean-up of your project and lab
station
TOTAL POINTS
240
250 minus (lowest score dropped
among Tasks 2-5, 9-12)
Unlike the ILRs, the final report is a comprehensive team-written report. Use word
processing software to generate all reports (ILRs and the final report) and submit the final
product in .pdf format. The mid-semester presentation is a 15-min. verbal,
Powerpoint-supported team presentation delivered in class to the instructors and
classmates. Content and format for the design proposal, mid-semester presentation, and
final report will be posted on Canvas and explained in class.
Tasks with point totals are summarized in the table above. Individual grading of all
demo/lab tasks is based on the ILR and on the lab presentation & demonstration. 5 of 10
points are allocated to the ILR. For weeks that you are the presenter, the other 5 of the 10
points are allocated based on your presentation and the success of the demonstration. For
weeks that you are not the presenter, the other 5 of the 10 points are allocated based on
the success of the demonstration, overall team progress, your individual contribution, and
your participation in the lab discussion. For presenters, the grade is weighted more
heavily towards the presentation; for non-presenters, it is weighted more heavily towards
the success of the demonstration. In all labs, integration of mechanism,
sensing/electronics, and programming/control necessary to achieve functionality will be
among the grading criteria.  The 20 points each for the final system demonstration and
final system demonstration “encore” are allocated among basic (subsystem) functionality,
advanced (integrated) functionality, robustness and agility, and “coolness” factors.
Project Website
We require that your team create and maintain a project website. The main purpose of the
website is to provide a window to the outside world on your team’s project. You can, for
example, point companies you are applying to for an internship or family and friends to it
to give a good idea of what your project is all about. Its secondary purpose is to provide a
central location for information useful to the team and instructors in performing and
evaluating the project.
The required website content is detailed in a document on Canvas under Course
Documents
Assignments Guidance
Website Guide. The website material should be
updated and refined over the course of the semester, and that document provides a
timeline with various associated milestones. The website must have a Documents section
that is comparable to a laboratory workbook. It should be a living documentation of the
team's work on the tasks and project and is a collection of notes, papers, datasheets,
schematics, code, flowcharts, and documentation that evolves over the course of the
5

semester. Documents are updated as changes are made. A log of changes and why they
are made is required.
The website will be reviewed by the instructors at three times during the semester (worth
respectively 6, 6, and 8 points) for a total of 20 points. The grading checkpoints will
occur between the third week of class and the first week of finals. Additional checks may
be made in order to give feedback unassociated with a grade. A good website with an
updated Documents section will make it easier to write the team's final report.
Policy on Late or Missed Assignments
No credit is given for unexcused absences from demonstrations or for late reports. Each
student may have one excused absence from a lab presentation for a legitimate reason
(e.g., a job interview). In order for an absence to be excused, the student must notify the
instructors ahead of time. ILR’s that are late by less than 12 hours will be assessed a
1-point penalty (of the maximum 5 points that each ILR grade is worth).
Teams and Selection
Students roughly break down into three different skill sets: computer engineers or
computer scientists (programming), electrical engineers (electronics, sensing, and
control), and mechanical engineers (mechanisms and control). You should form teams
consisting of at least one student from each of these skill set areas. Ideally, teams should
be 3-4 persons.  5-person teams may be allowed in case of need.
Laboratory
This course has TechSpark access.  Each of the electronics stations in TechSpark has
power supplies, oscilloscopes, meters, and test equipment.  A number of portable sets of
test equipment will also be made available.  These portable stations need to be put away
after each use but will be available to be used in the Assembly during TechSpark hours.
Small tools are available for use in designated areas of the laboratory.
Machine Shop, Manufacturing and Parts
Before embarking on the full-scale model, you should make small-scale models of
mechanical components and assemblies. Depending on your project, you might use balsa
wood or cardboard. Toy and hobby stores are great sources of items that might assist you
in building such models. See the vendor list on the Canvas website for suggestions of
where to shop for parts. Electronics prototypes may be constructed on protoboards, but
final construction must have robust solder or wire-wrap connections. We have some small
tools, such as a drill, saw and vise, available for use in the TechSpark.
Final projects are to be constructed with durable materials to include aluminum, steel,
plexiglass, and wood. Fabrication kits such as Lego may be used for prototyping, but not
for the final system; part of the goal is to give you experience in soup-to-nuts design and
fabrication, and Lego-like building-block kits partially defeat this goal.
Purchasing and Reimbursements - Tentative
6

Tentatively, a guideline reimbursable limit for the total parts and materials cost purchased
by the team is $900; however, each team will create a proposed budget and negotiate a
final reimbursable project cost with the instructors. Each team may scavenge parts worth
up to an additional $200 plus the amount of any underspending on the baseline.
Reasonable estimates of the value of scavenged parts should be made. Finally, each team
may spend up to $100 out of its own pocket unreimbursed. At the end of the semester, the
instructors keep all parts supplied or reimbursed. These will be available for students in
succeeding years. Once the enrollment has stabilized, the final exact budget for all teams
will be announced.
Department policy is that students in the course will not make (reimbursable) purchases.
Parts will instead be ordered on a regular basis by a member of the Mechanical
Engineering staff. Teams will post the parts they want to purchase in an on-line
spreadsheet according to a procedure we will make available on Canvas.
In the early labs, we will provide teams with microcontrollers, motors, sensors, and some
low-cost parts. If you want ultimately to use any of these parts in your project, include
their value against the budget total. See the vendor list under Course
Documents
Responsibilities of the Students
If you are going to drop the course, please try to do so before teams are finalized.
Students that drop the class late in the semester affect their team's progress. In the event
of late drops or unavoidable problems, the instructors try to compensate by adjusting the
metrics for grading.
Each group works independently of other groups, although cross-pollination of design
ideas tends to occur naturally. Each member of each group assumes an equitable portion
of the technical tasks. Technical tasks include all aspects of design, including report
writing. Although gathering of information or materials for design or prototype are
important, by themselves such tasks are not considered technical and therefore will not be
counted as satisfactory workload. Each student is graded individually. Therefore, each
student is required to be involved in a meaningful way in the engineering tasks involved
at each stage of the design process, starting from concept development, to prototype, to
testing, to communication of the results.
Team members are selected based on various skills. Each member has basic
responsibilities to the team. These responsibilities include timely attendance in class and
at pre-scheduled out-of-class group meetings and active involvement in all assigned tasks.
Individuals are expected to help others on their team learn and participate in their area of
expertise. In particular, individuals must demonstrate a willingness to cross disciplinary
boundaries and provide effort on mechanical, electrical, and programming/control aspects
of tasks. Individuals are not to focus completely on their area of expertise with little
7

regard to the other complementary mechatronic areas. If there is an irreconcilable
problem within your team, you must bring it to the instructors' attention as soon as
possible.
Each team member has the responsibility to ensure that documentation in the team's
website is updated, comprehensive and accurate.
Attendance in class is mandatory. In case of difficulties among the group members which
cannot be handled by the group members, inform the instructors promptly. Waiting until
the end of the term to bring up such problems is too late.
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes):
(1) an ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering: This is
addressed by the following course activities: design of the project; implementation of the
project; and iterative design adjustments based on instructor feedback, evaluation, and
team interactions.
(2) an ability to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs within
realistic constraints such as economic, environmental, social, political, ethical, health
and safety, manufacturability, and sustainability: The design component of the course
specifically addresses this criterion. Of the factors mentioned, those which are regularly
considered are economic ($250-350 budget limit), health and safety, manufacturability,
and sustainability. The degree to which the other factors mentioned are addressed by a
team depends on the project. Some of these issues also come up during the design
mock-up and mid-semester presentations and during weekly status meetings with the
instructors.
(2.1) an ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems: This criterion
is addressed by the design and implementation components of the course. Students are
given a desired system functionality, such as automatic pancake-flipping or M&M
sorting, and performance specifications such as size and speed. They then design a
system that has the components necessary to realize the functions and performance
specifications, and iteratively build and test the system.
(3) an ability to communicate effectively: Each team gives four presentations (design
mock-up, mid-semester status, final lab system demo, and public presentation) and ten
subsystem demos in the lab. Primary presenters for subsystem demos are designated in
round-robin fashion from week to week. Each team also writes two major documents
(design proposal and final report), and each student writes ten weekly individual lab
reports. Finally, starting about halfway through the semester, teams meet weekly with the
instructors for an interactive discussion on status.
(4) an understanding of professional and ethical responsibility and the impact of
engineering solutions in a global, economic, environmental, and societal context: This
8

topic is discussed in the first lecture and then raised as needed throughout the semester.
Typical examples are: setting and meeting milestones (both advertised project deadlines
and personal deadlines for coordination with teammates), meeting attendance
expectations, documenting contributions of individual team members, giving credit in
documents (e.g. through citations), and reporting results truthfully. Students are asked in
their final report to comment on how their design would need to be modified in order to
be appropriate as a product provided by a spin-off company. This raises economic and
sometimes societal issues. Environmental issues are sometimes touched on indirectly, e.g.,
use of batteries vs. wall power, power efficiency.
(5) an ability to function on multi-disciplinary teams: Projects are team-based. Good
cooperation and division of labor within each team is crucial to success in the course.
(6) an ability to design and conduct experiments, as well as to analyze and interpret
data: The evaluation part of the course involves defining and running experiments on the
designed devices and analyzing and explaining the results. Typical examples are testing
and characterizing the accuracy of a linear drive based on a rotary motor or the
repeatability of a pneumatic pancake-flipper.
(7) a recognition of the need for, and an ability to engage in life-long learning: The
projects require students to learn about new material in their own main disciplines (ME -
mechanism, ECE - electronics, or CS - programming), and we encourage
crossdisciplinary learning and activity to increase the educational benefits and likelihood
of project success. This sets an example for the need for life-long learning.
(7.1) a knowledge of contemporary issues: An early lecture includes a review of patents
related to the project. The design proposal typically requires teams to examine existing
partial or full solutions to the project challenge and evaluate them in the light of
available resources, materials, power budget, and programming tools. The final report
requires consideration of how the project or a variant of it might meet contemporary
societal needs.
(7.2) an ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary
for engineering practice: These skills are addressed through the implementation and
evaluation components of the course.
CMU Diversity Statement
Every individual must be treated with respect. The ways we are diverse are many and
are critical to excellence and an inclusive community. They include but are not limited to:
race, color, national origin, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, gender identity,
religion, creed, ancestry, belief, veteran status, or genetic information. We at CMU, will
work to promote diversity, equity and inclusion because it is just and necessary for
innovation.  Therefore, while we are imperfect, we will work inside and outside of our
classrooms, to increase our commitment to build and sustain a community that embraces
these values.
9

It is the responsibility of each of us to create a safer and more inclusive environment. Bias
incidents, whether intentional or unintentional in their occurrence, contribute to creating
an unwelcoming environment for individuals and groups at the university. If you
experience or observe unfair or hostile treatment on the basis of identity, we encourage
you to speak out for justice and support in the moment and and/or share your experience
anonymously using the following resources:
Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion: csdi@andrew.cmu.edu, (412) 268-2150,
www.cmu.edu/student-diversity
All reports will be acknowledged, documented and a determination will be made
regarding a course of action. All experiences shared will be used to transform the campus
climate.
This policy applies, in all respects, to this course.
CMU