18-224/624: Intro to Open-Source FPGA and ASIC Chip Design 
Spring Semester 2025 
Course Personnel: 
Instructor: 
Bill Nace 
A206 Hamerschlag Hall 
wnace@cmu.edu 
Office Hours: 1-3pm Wednesdays 
Teaching Assistants: 
Guarav Savant
Petros Emmanouilidis 
gsavant@andrew.cmu.edu 
pemmanou@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: TBA 
Office Hours: TBA 
Academic Services: 
ECE Course Hub (aka Academic Services Center) 
1113 Hamerschlag Hall 
The ECE Hub is open Monday-Friday, 9am-5pm 
Class Schedule: 
Lecture:  
Tuesday & Thursday, 2:00 p.m. – 3:20 p.m., PH 126A 
Pre-requisite: 18-240, grade of C or better. 
Undergraduate Course Designation: Non-Core, Non-Area 
Undergraduate Course Area: Computer Hardware 
Course Description: 
This course is a low-barrier to entry introduction to chip design.  Using open-source 
tools, the student will learn how to design, implement, emulate, and verify an ASIC 
chip.  Along the way, the student will be exposed to many common tools and 
techniques in the chip-implementation area.   
For the final project in the course, students will tapeout a non-trivial digital design, to 
be fabricated using an open-hardware flow.  It may take six to twelve months, but 
students will eventually end up with an actual chip that contains their design. 
Textbook: 
None 

Course Canvas: 
We will use Canvas to communicate with you (announcements, copies of handouts, 
lab support files, etc).  Access is through: www.cmu.edu/canvas. 
Piazza Question Website: 
The 18-224/624 staff is committed to answering any questions you may have in order 
to help clarify concepts and concerns.  We use the Piazza website as our primary 
mechanism to help with such questions.  Students are encouraged to answer, 
discuss, or comment on any question posted on Piazza.  Our course page is found at 
https://piazza.com/cmu/spring2025/18224624/home. 
Mailing list: 
Any email sent to ece224-staff@lists.andrew.cmu.edu will be delivered to all TAs and 
the Professors.  We encourage you to use Piazza for questions, but will answer 
anything sent to this email list as well.  Please use this email address rather than 
sending email directly to a particular TA or Professor. 
Exercise Handin 
Some exercises will be turned in using Gradescope.  You will receive an invitation to 
the Gradescope course during the first week of the semester. 

Grading Algorithm: 
Your grade in 18-224/624 will be calculated based on your performance on a number 
of events.  A weighted average will be computed using the following weights: 
When calculating mid-term grades, no homework or quiz grades will be dropped.  
Both midterm and final grades will be assigned based on the following grading 
contract.  The instructor reserves the right to assign higher grades than guaranteed by 
the contract.  Such a modification will apply equally to all students in the course (i.e. in 
no instance will a student with a lower average than another student obtain a higher 
letter grade) 
Weight
Event
224
624
30%
25%
Exercises and Homework.  The 2 lowest scoring will be 
dropped to allow for handin troubles, illness, travel, 
interviews, weddings, funerals or other personal issues.
30%
25%
Quizzes.  Roughly weekly, there will be a quiz at the 
beginning of the exercise class.  Quiz material will mostly be 
drawn from the previous lecture, though about a quarter of 
each quiz will come from previous weeks.  The 2 lowest 
scoring quizzes will be dropped to allow for illness, travel, 
interviews, and etc. A missed quiz cannot be made-up.
10%
Paper Review.  Those taking 18-624 will critically review an 
academic paper about a topic from the class.  The review 
will be written as an academic literature review.
10%
10%
Participation.  Active participation in lecture and exercise 
classes. You don't get these points merely for showing up.  
Instead, you get them for asking questions, making 
comments, and being actively involved for the time you 
spend in-class.
30%
30%
Project.  The chip tapeout is pretty much the focus of the 
entire course.  You will be graded on meeting intermediate 
and final milestones as well as the complexity and design of 
your project.

Extra Credit: Only graded events offered to all students in the course will be 
considered for the final grade.  No individual will be offered “extra-credit” or a “make-
up project” to improve their grade, as that would not be fair to other students.  If you 
wish to have a better grade, don’t wait until after the final to ask -- the only way to get 
a better grade is to do better work (and thus learn more) throughout the semester. 
Grading Appeals:  If you believe there has been a mistake in the grading of any 
assignment (Homework, Exercise or Quiz), then please bring it to our notice so we 
might correct it.  Grade appeals must be submitted in writing within 1 week of the 
date where material was returned/released.  Appeals may be made on Gradescope 
(for homework and exams) or on Piazza (in a private post). 
Accommodations for Students with Disabilities: 
If you have a disability and are registered with the Office of Disability Resources, 
please come and talk to me to discuss your needs.  You will also need to use their 
online system to formally notify me of your accommodations. I will work with you to 
ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate.   
If you suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from accommodations 
but are not yet registered with the Office of Disability Resources, I encourage you to 
contact them at access@andrew.cmu.edu. 
Your Health and Well-being 
Things at CMU can get stressful at times. Please remember to take good care of 
yourself! It is important for you to stay healthy, and to reach out to your support 
network and to other resources that can help you when things start feeling difficult. 
Know that you are not alone - all of us can feel overwhelmed at times, and all of us 
benefit from help and support during those times. There are several resources that we 
encourage you to make use of if you are going through any sort of struggle. 
Sometimes, even if you don't think that you need it, or that it's not serious enough to 
warrant reaching out, you may be surprised at how friends, family, course staff, and 
professionals can help you - consider reaching out to any of them you trust for help, 
or to get connected to resources that can provide the help you could use. 
Weighted Average
Letter Grade
>= 90%
A
>= 80%
B
>= 70%
C
>= 60%
D
< 60%
R

An excellent resource at CMU is Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) - they 
are excellent listeners, and can help you through a wide variety of situations (including 
ones that many of you may not consider when you hear the terms counseling and 
psychology).  CaPS is available for students on and off campus, and can help you 
with situations such as academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings such as 
anxiety or depression. 
Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) 
https://www.cmu.edu/counseling/ 
(412) 268-2922 
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call someone 
immediately, day or night: 
CaPS: (412) 268-2922 
Re:solve Crisis Network: (888) 796-8226 
If the situation is life threatening, call the police 
On campus: CMU Police: (412) 268-2323 
Off campus: 911 
Finally, if you have any questions about this, or would like to talk, please do not 
hesitate to reach out to one of us. 
Policies Related to Diversity and Inclusion 
We believe that every human being is special and precious and deserving of respect.  
Unfortunately, many have been treated in non-respectful ways, often horrifyingly so, 
based on their gender, race, age, sexuality, disabilities, or other status.  We will do 
everything possible to ensure that all students are treated with the respect they 
deserve while participating in this course.  Such respect requires that every student's 
diverse learning needs are addressed and that all student's diverse perspectives are 
treated as a source of strength and a benefit for all in the course. 
If you feel you have been treated otherwise by professors, course staff or other 
students, you are encouraged to discuss the situation with the professors.  We will 
take the situation seriously, provide you with anonymity, and act on the information. 
You should also know that there are department and university-level resources as well: 
• ECE Diversity Committee Feedback Form: Submit positive or negative feedback 
regarding the department in general, a specific course, or an incident they may have 
experienced to this link: https://forms.gle/zmGo8SaoPH8trkEN8 
• Campus Climate and Bias Reporting Protocol: cmu.ethicspoint.com. More 
information is available at the CCBRP website: cmu.edu/title-ix/how-to-report-+-
options-for-resolution/ccbrp/index.html 
Further, your suggestions on how we can do a better job in these areas is encouraged 
and appreciated.  Please let us know of any areas of improvement. 

Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education.  
ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the 
courses you take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 18-224 
and in what manner they are fulfilled.  The objectives are numbered from “1” through 
“7” in the standard ABET parlance.  Those objectives not fulfilled by 18-224 have 
been omitted from the following list. 
(1) An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering 
problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and 
mathematics:  The course poses many problems; on homework, in exercises, 
and, especially, for the tapeout project.  The student will use mathematical and 
engineering concepts to model and design digital circuits and to solve 
complex problems in the digital design and computer architecture domain. 
(2) An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet 
specified needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, 
as well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors: 
The course is an introduction to the field of chip design, so the student will 
start to gain insight into the process of applying their digital design skills to 
build systems with specified requirements.  Some economic and 
manufacturability constraints will be discussed.  At all appropriate points, 
safety will be emphasized. 
(6) An ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, 
analyze and interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw 
conclusions: Exercises and the tapeout project provide for the opportunity to 
conduct experiments.  The student will design experiments and analyze data 
throughout the debugging process in order to generate a functioning product.