1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18632: Hardware Security   
Spring 2025 
 
 
Instructor: 
 
Sam Pagliarini 
Office Location:        HH2120 
Email Address:         pagliarini@cmu.edu  
Office Hours:  
Fridays 9-11am 
 
Teaching Assistant: - 
Email Address: 
- 
Office Hours:  
-
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html 
 
 
Course Description:  
This course covers basic concepts in the security of hardware systems. Topics covered 
include active and passive attacks, reverse engineering, counterfeiting, obfuscation, and 
design of hardware security primitives (e.g., random number generators, physical 
unclonable functions, and cryptographic accelerators). Lab sessions will give students 
hands on experience with performing attacks, developing countermeasures, and 
implementing secure hardware building blocks. 
 
Number of Units:  
12 
 
Pre-requisites:  
- 
 
Graduate Area:  
 
 
Class Lecture: 
- 
 
 
Required Textbook: - 
 
 
Suggested Reading: Check reading assignments in Canvas. 
 

 
2 
 
Reference Materials:  Check reading assignments in Canvas. 
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: 
Reverse Engineering, Hardware Obfuscation, Cryptographic hardware engineering, True 
random number generators, Physically Unclonable Functions 
 
Course Canvas:  
https://canvas.cmu.edu/courses/44613  
 
Course Website: 
https://canvas.cmu.edu/courses/44613  
 
Homework Projects:  
Check assignments in Canvas. Deadlines are March 12 and Apr 25. 
 
Reading Assignments:  
Check reading assignments in Canvas. 
 
Grading Algorithm:  
Two projects and final exam make up the final grade as follows: 
 P1=20% of the grade 
 P2=40% of the grade 
 Ex=40% of the grade 
 
The weighted Average Letter Grade follows the distribution below: 
>= 90% A 
>= 80% B 
>= 70% C 
>= 60% D 
< 60% R 
 
A couple more items worth mentioning since they are grade related: the course has 
several labs, one every week. These labs are *NOT* graded but they are a build-up to the 
projects. Not completing the labs on time will put you in a very bad position to complete 
the projects on time. For the projects, you can present as many times as needed 
*BEFORE* the deadlines. There are no penalties for presenting it multiple times and fix 
from one iteration to the next. In fact, this is highly encouraged. For this reason, there are 
absolutely *NO* grace days on the projects. There are also no extra credits for early 
presentation/delivery. 
 
The final exam does not have any coding questions. Why? Because the projects are 
meant to check your ability to write security-aware hardware description, whereas the 
exam will check your understanding of technical concepts. The exam features questions 
from the lecture materials *AND* questions from the reading assignments.  
 

 
3 
 
There will be integrity checks as the assumption is that every project is the work of a 
single individual. A project is considered delivered if submitted on Canvas before the 
deadline and it has been presented to the instructor also before the deadline.  
 
A final note on ChatGPT: while not strictly banned, please understand that this is a tool 
that is severely limited when describing hardware. It makes several mistakes, and no sane 
circuit designer would consider it to generate security modules. You shouldn’t either. It is 
a waste of your time and the instructor’s time.  
 
 
Tentative Course Calendar:  
Check schedule in Canvas under cheat_sheet.pdf 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your 
education.  ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of 
all the courses you take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 
this course and in what manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” 
through “7” in the standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course 
have been omitted from the following list: 
 
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics 
2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified 
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, 
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors 
3. an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences 
4. an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering 
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of 
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts 
5. an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan 
tasks, and meet objectives 
6. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions 
7. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies. 
 
ECE