1 
 
 
 
 
18-631 
Introduction to Information Security 
Course Syllabus 
 
Fall 2024 
MW 10:00-11:50 
 
Instructor 
 
Jema David Ndibwile 
jeman@cmu.edu   
Office Hours:   12:30–17:30 CAT Monday & Wednesday (By appointment only) – D102 
 
Teaching Assistants: 
 
Martha Kachweka -mkachwek@andrew.cmu.edu 
Hussein Murashi - hmurashi@andrew.cmu.edu 
Roland Dunee - rdunee@andrew.cmu.edu 
Fidele Rurangwa - frurangw@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
Course Web Page 
 
Canvas: Introduction to Information Security (cmu.edu) 
(check on a regular basis) 
 
The class web page is hosted on the Canvas course system. Homework is assigned and 
turned in via Canvas. Students are responsible for information conveyed to the class via 
Canvas announcements. 
 
Optional Textbooks: 
 
This course does not have a required textbook. The material is conveyed through articles and 
papers assigned for each lecture. The following books are useful references. The first book can 
be borrowed short term from Farida Ndangiza. The other two are freely available online. 
 
1. Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice, 5th edition, by William 
Stallings. Publisher: Prentice Hall (2010), New Jersey, ISBN: 0136097049 
2. Security Engineering: A Guide to Building Dependable Distributed Systems, 2nd 
edition, by Ross Anderson. Publisher: John Wiley and sons (2008), New York, ISBN: 0-
470- 06852-3. 
Also available for free online: https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~rja14/book.html 
3. The Handbook of Applied Cryptography, by Alfred J. Menezes, Paul C. van Oorschot 
and Scott A. Vanstone, Publisher: CRC Press (2001), ISBN: 0-8493-8523-7. 
Also available for free online: https://cacr.uwaterloo.ca/hac/ 

2 
 
Course Description: 
 
Our growing reliance on information systems for daily activities, ranging from 
communications to financial exchanges, has made information security a central issue for us 
as individuals and for our society’s critical infrastructure. The course introduces the technical 
and policy foundations of information security. The main objective of the course is to enable 
students to reason about information systems from a security engineering perspective, 
taking into account technical, economic, and policy factors. The course is fast paced and 
covers a broad set of topics including elementary cryptography; access control; common 
software vulnerabilities; common network vulnerabilities; policy and export control laws; 
privacy; management and assurance; economics of security; and special topics in information 
security. 
 
 
Prerequisites: 
 
The course assumes a basic working knowledge of computers, networks, basic programming 
as well as an elementary mathematics background. It does not assume prior exposure to 
topics in computer or communications security. Students lacking a technical background (e.g., 
students without any prior exposure to programming) are expected to catch up through self-
study. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
 
The goal of this course is to provide a broad understanding of information security concepts 
as a basis for developing security processes in an organization. This includes understanding 
security as a process as well as security implications for software engineering, networking, 
privacy, and policy. 
 
A secondary objective is to provide a working knowledge of topics such as cryptography, 
privacy, network security, and infrastructure management, so that students can acquire the 
necessary background for more advanced security courses. 
 
By the end of this course, students will be able to reason about systems from the perspective 
of a security engineer. That is, they should be able to define the system to protect, determine 
the security properties that are desired for this system, identify the possible threats to these 
security properties and their likelihood of occurrence, and consider possible mitigations 
against these threats. 
 
Course Themes 
 
Four major themes, grouped in five scheduling units: 
 
Foundations & cryptography (Units 1 and 2) 
The theme starts by laying down the fundamentals of cybersecurity, encompassing 
network security, risk management, and security policies. This foundation provides 
insights into safeguarding digital assets from evolving threats. 
It then shifts focus to cryptography, exploring encryption algorithms, 
authentication methods, and digital signatures. This cryptographic knowledge 
ensures secure communication and data protection. By mastering both 
cybersecurity fundamentals and cryptography, students are equipped to develop 
robust security strategies and effectively address intricate challenges in the realm 
of information technology and cybersecurity. 

3 
 
 
Endpoint security (Unit 3) 
This theme covers strategies and technologies for safeguarding individual devices, like 
computers and other associated systems, from cybersecurity threats. This module 
teaches students about antivirus tools, firewalls, intrusion detection, access control, 
buffer overflows and more. It emphasizes the importance of securing endpoints as 
potential entry points for cyberattacks and provides insights into protecting data and 
networks effectively. 
 
Network security (Unit 4) 
This network security course module addresses DDoS attacks, TCP/IP vulnerabilities, 
anonymity through Tor networks, session hijacking, and web security. It covers 
strategies for detecting and mitigating DDoS attacks, explores weaknesses in the 
TCP/IP protocol suite, discusses the use of Tor networks for online anonymity, delves 
into session hijacking prevention, and introduces web security measures including 
defense against common vulnerabilities like SQL injection and cross-site scripting. 
 
Human and socio-economic factors (Unit 5) 
This cybersecurity course module offers a succinct analysis of the crucial roles that 
socioeconomic factors and human behaviors play in cybersecurity. Students learn how 
to develop effective defenses by evaluating user interactions, decision-making, and 
security awareness. The course material also explores the drivers of cyberattacks, 
financial incentives, and regulatory impacts, promoting a thorough comprehension of 
the changing cybersecurity landscape and approaches to overcoming its difficulties. 
 
Grading Scale: 
Homework: 
60% 
Midterm exam: 
10% 
Final project: 
30% 
A+ 
100% 
B+ 
87.00-89.99% 
     C+ 
75.00-79.99% 
A 
95.00-99.99% 
B 
83.00-86.99% 
     C 
70.00-74.99% 
A- 
90.00-94.99% 
B- 
80.00-82.99% 
     C- 
69.99% and below 
 
A+ cannot be achieved through any bonus points or 
curving C- is considered a failing grade at the CMU 
graduate level There is NO rounding up so make every 
point count! 
 
Class Policies: 
 
You are expected to attend every class. While in class laptops should be closed unless we 
are working specifically on an in-class computer assignment. Mobile phones should be 
silenced. No calls or messages should be taken or sent while in class. All communication in 
the class, with the instructor, when working in groups, or with TAs must be in English. 
 
Homework assignments must be submitted via Canvas in PDF or TXT format. The timestamp 
given by Canvas will be the determining factor if the assignment is late or not. Any 
assignment turned in late will only be eligible for 50% of the original points for the first 24 
hours after the due date. After 24 hours the assignment will NOT be eligible for a grade. The 
lowest homework grade will be dropped. 
 
Students are encouraged to talk to each other, to the TAs, to the instructor, or to anyone else 

4 
 
about any of the homework assignments. Any assistance, though, must be limited to discussion 
of the problem and sketching general approaches to a solution. Each student must write out 
his or her own homework solutions. Consulting another student’s solution is prohibited, and 
submitted solutions may not be copied from any source. Copying from someone else’s 
homework (present or past year’s solutions), lab write-up, or exam or allowing another student 
to copy his/her work, will be considered as cheating. Any form of collaboration is strictly 
prohibited on the exams and is considered cheating. If you have any question about whether 
some activity would constitute cheating, please feel free to ask the instructor. If you 
collaborate with any other person on your homework assignment, list their name(s) at the top 
of the first page of your assignment. 
 
If you have special circumstances approved by the Disabled Student Services office, it is up to 
you to make arrangements with the instructor ahead of time so that we can accommodate you 
appropriately.