1 
 
Course Syllabus 
18631: Introduction to Information Security 
Spring 2025 
 
Meeting Days, Times, Location:  
Section A       MW 7:00 pm – 8:20 pm Eastern time 
HH B131 
Section SV     MW 4:00 pm – 5:20 pm Pacific time 
B23 211 
Recitations Days, Times, Location:   
Section A       F 3:00 pm – 3:50 pm Eastern time  
BH A53 
Section SV     F 12:00 pm – 12:50 pm Pacific time      
B23 212 
Units: 12, Section(s): A (Pittsburgh), SV (Silicon Valley) 
 
 
Instructors (Section A/B/SV) 
Name 
Dr. Limin Jia 
Contact Info 
liminjia at cmu.edu 
Office location 
CIC 2216 
Office hours 
See canvas 
 
Course Support:  
Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html 
 
Course Canvas https://cmu.instructure.com/ 
Recorded Lectures 
Within a short time after class concludes, each class is uploaded for you to re-watch online if you forget details of a lecture. This is 
particularly helpful before exams.  
Logistics 
Lectures: The class modality is in-person attendance, where students are expected to come to campus and join the classroom. Lectures 
are recorded and viewable offline (see Canvas and campuswire).   
 
Recitations: We offer in-person recitation sessions. Attendance of the recitation sessions is voluntary and is not required but highly 
encouraged. Most recitation sessions are TA office hours addressing questions about homework assignments. A handful of the recitation 
sessions will include presentations by the TAs on topics relating to homework assignments and review sessions of past exams run by 
the instructor. These sessions will be recorded and viewable offline (see Canvas and campuswire).   
Textbooks  
This course does not have a required textbook. All readings are available on canvas.  
 

 
2 
 
Course Description 
 
Our growing reliance on information systems for daily activities, ranging from remote communications to financial exchanges, has made 
information security a central issue of our critical infrastructure. The course introduces the technical foundations of information security. 
The main objective of the course is to enable students to reason about information systems from a security engineering perspective. 
Topics covered in the course include elementary cryptography; access control; common software vulnerabilities; common network 
vulnerabilities; privacy; and special topics in information security.  
Prerequisites: The course assumes a basic working knowledge of computers, networks, C and UNIX programming, and an basic 
mathematics background, but does not assume any prior exposure to topics in computer or communications security. Students lacking 
technical background (e.g., students without any prior exposure to programming) are expected to catch up through self-study. 
 
Graduate Course Area Software Systems and Computer Networking 
 
Course Wiki: 
Students are encouraged to use the ECE wiki to provide feedback about the course at: http://wiki.ece.cmu.edu/index.php  
Course Objectives  
This course primarily aims at providing a level of literacy in information security adequate enough to understand the security 
implications on a number of diverse domains including software engineering; networking; privacy; and policy.  
A secondary objective is to provide a working knowledge of topics such as cryptography, privacy, network security, and infrastructure 
management, so that students can acquire the necessary background for more advanced security courses.  
By the end of this course, students will be able to reason about systems from the perspective of a security engineer. That is, they should 
be able to deﬁne the system to protect; determine the security properties that are desired for this system; identify the possible threats to 
these security properties, and their likelihood of occurrence; and consider possible mitigations against these threats. 
More specifically, the course will fulfill the following education objectives in relationship to the program objectives. 
1. Technical skills in building secure information systems. 
Students will be able to apply abstract mathematical and scientific concepts such as cryptography to enforce security 
properties. Students will be able to use concrete engineering techniques and tools such as state of the art security 
mechanisms, defenses and tools to build secure systems. 
 
2. Technical skills in analyzing security of information systems. 
Students will be able to design and conduct experiments, as well as to analyze and interpret data to infer security threats and 
effectiveness of possible mitigations. 
 
3. Analytical and creative skills in identifying problems within context and find solutions. 
a) Students will be able to design a system, component, or process to meet desired security requirements within realistic 
constraints such as economic, environmental, social, political, ethical, health and safety, manufacturability, and 
sustainability. 
b) Students will be able to identify, formulate, and solve simple security issues in modern computer and information 
systems. 
c) Students will be able to understand the impact of engineering solutions in a global, economic, environmental, and 
societal context. Students will be able to see how information security is not only an engineering necessity, but how 
it affects non-technical fields, such as management and risk analysis. 
d) Student will gain knowledge of contemporary issues and will be aware of the current pressing information security 
challenges. 
 
4. Skills in functioning within a larger work environment. 
a) Students will be able to converse about security issues both with engineering teams and with management to function 
on multi-disciplinary teams. 

 
3 
 
b) Students will be exposed to ethical and legal ramifications of information security to obtain an understanding of 
professional and ethical responsibility. 
c) Students will be able to develop principled arguments to justify secure system design so they can communicate 
effectively to future team members, managements, and clients. 
 
5. Recognition for the need for, and an ability to engage in life-long learning.  
Students will be equipped with fundamental knowledge that will allow them to further their study of information security and 
adapt to the frequently changing information security landscape, independent of the specific tools in use. 
Course schedule (tentative) 
Please check Canvas: https://cmu.instructure.com/  
 
Unit 1: Introduction 
Mon, Jan 13 
Jia 
Introduction 
Wed, Jan 15 
Jia 
Threat models 
Fri, Jan 17 
 
No recitation 
Mon, Jan 20 
 
No class MLK day 
Wed, Jan 22 
Jia 
Basic security properties 
Fri, Jan 24 
 
No recitation 
 
 
 
 
Unit 2: Cryptography basics 
Mon, Jan 27 
Jia 
Cryptography I: history, symmetric key algorithms 
Wed, Jan 29 
Jia 
Cryptography II: hash-based algorithms 
Fri, Jan 31 
 
Recitation for HW1 
Mon, Feb 3 
Jia 
Cryptography III: public key algorithms, PKI 
 
 
 
 
Unit 3: Access Control 
Wed, Feb 5 
Jia 
Access control I: Operating Systems 
Fri, Feb 7 
 
Recitation for HW1 
Mon, Feb 10 
Jia 
Access control II: Password/two factor 
authentication 
Wed, Feb 12 
Jia 
Access control III: Biba/BLP/information flow 
security 
Fri, Feb 14 
 
Recitation for HW2 
 
 
 
 
Unit 4: Software/hardware 
Security 
Mon, Feb 17 
Woo 
Buffer overflows 
/basic software vulnerabilities 
Wed, Feb 19 
Jia 
Hardware-based security  
(TCG, SGX, TEE) 
Fri, Feb 21 
 
Recitation for HW3 
Mon, Feb 24 
Woo 
Hardware Issues/ 
Test 1 review 

 
4 
 
Wed, Feb 26 
Woo 
Test 1 
Fri, Feb 28 
 
Recitation for HW3 
 
Mon, Mar 3 
 
 
Wed, Mar 5 
 
Spring Break 
Fri, Mar 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mon, Mar 10 
Woo 
Web Security 
Unit 5: Network/Web Security 
Wed, Mar 12 
Woo 
Networks I: Network protocol vulnerabilities 
Fri, Mar 14 
 
Recitation for HW4 
Mon, Mar 17 
Jia 
Networks II: DDoS attacks 
 
 
 
 
Unit 6: Crypto Applications 
Wed, Mar 19 
Jia 
Security protocols 
Fri, Mar 21 
 
Recitation for HW5/review of test 2 
Mon, Mar 24 
Jia 
Security protocols (cont'd), SSL 
Wed, Mar 26 
 
Test 2 
Fri, Mar 28 
 
Recitation for HW5 
Mon, Mar 31 
Jia 
Anonymity 
Wed, Apr 2 
Jia 
Cryptocurrencies 
Fri, Apr 4 
 
Rcitation for HW6 
 
 
 
 
Unit 7: Broader view of security 
Mon, Apr 7 
Jia 
Usable security 
Wed, Apr 9 
Guest 
lecture TBD 
Fri, Apr 11 
 
Carnival No class 
Mon, Apr 14 
Jia 
Test 3 review 
Wed, Apr 16 
 
Test 3 
Fri, Apr 18 
Jia 
case analysis check up 
Mon, Apr 21 
Jia 
Case analysis 
Wed, Apr 23 
Jia 
Case analysis 
 
Fri, Apr 25 
 
No recitation 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
Grading  
 
The final course grade will be calculated using the following categories: 
 
Assessment 
Percentage of Final Grade 
Participation 
10% 
Homework Assignments  
50% 
Tests 
30% 
Case analysis 
10% 
 
Course Resources  
● 
Canvas is the primary homepage for most course content. This includes Syllabus, readings, 
announcements, and course calendar, and assignments.  
● 
Gradescope will be used for some assignment’s submissions.  
● 
Piazza will be used for discussions and questions.   
● 
Recorded Lectures: Within 24hours after class concludes, each class is uploaded for you to re-watch 
online if you forget details of a lecture. Links to recordings will be posted on Canvas.  
Course and Grading Policies 
● 
Language: This course is entirely taught in English, and all materials submitted by the students, including 
homework, exams, assignments, and quizzes, must be submitted in English. In-class oral participation must 
also be in English. Homework, quizzes or exams submitted in a language other than English will not be 
graded. Please do not worry about making grammatical or vocabulary mistakes. We will never 
penalize you for using improper grammar or vocabulary, as long as your statements remain clear 
and unambiguous.  
● 
Lectures: We will not check attendance, but it is really in your best interest to attend each lecture. In-class 
participation is encouraged and expected. In other words, please do ask questions and make constructive 
comments during lectures. Additionally, you are only eligible to take quizzes if you attend class.  
● 
Auditors & Non-degree Students: Auditors are expected to attend lectures, but cannot submit homework, 
hand in tests, or take exams. Auditors only get a record of the audit at the end of the semester. On the other 
hand, non-degree students are subject to the same rules and expectations as degree students. 
● 
Cell Phone and Wi-Fi: Please remember to turn off or silence your phones (and other alarms) before each 
class meeting. We will subtract i points from your total grade the i-th time your phone/alarm/pager rings in 
class during the semester. No exceptions.  
This semester involves regular use of technology during class. Research has shown that divided attention is 
detrimental to learning, so we encourage you to close any windows not directly related to what we are doing 
while you are in class. Please turn off notifications and limit other likely sources of technology disruption, so 
you can fully engage with the material, each other, and the instructors. This will create a better learning 
environment for everyone. If you do not have the necessary equipment, please contact your HUB 
liaison who is available to help you tap into appropriate resources. 
● 
Late Homework Submission Policy: For full credit, homework must be turned in by 7:00PM EST 
(Pittsburgh time) on the due date. You have three “grace days” that you can use at any time during the 

 
6 
 
semester for late homework. That is, you can turn in a total of two homework assignments a day late (“a day 
late” is deﬁned as any delay between 0 and 24 hours after the deadline,) one homework two days late, etc. 
You do not need to notify anyone prior to using (a) grace day(s). Assignments turned in late after “grace 
credit” are used up will be penalized by 25% per day. Homework late by more than three days will not be 
graded. Exceptions require either prior arrangement or doctor-validated medical excuse. 
● 
Re-grade policy:  Re-Grade requests will be processed via Gradescope for a limited time window. More 
details will be posted on Pizza for each assignment about the deadlines when available. 
● 
Attendance and Participation: Students are expected to attend and participate in class sessions. Quizzes 
and in-class activities will be administered to ensure that students are following and learning the material 
covered in classes (see grading section below). That said, we also recognize that students may need to 
miss class for a variety of reasons (religious observance, job interview, university-sanctioned event, or 
illness). For that reason, all students are allowed to miss TWO quizzes that will not impact their participation 
grade. There are no make-up quizzes. 
● 
Accommodations for students with disabilities: If you have a disability and have an accommodations 
letter from the Disability Resources office, we encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs 
with us as early in the semester as possible. We will work with you to ensure that accommodations are 
provided as appropriate. If you suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from 
accommodations but are not yet registered with the Office of Disability Resources, we encourage you to 
contact them at access@andrew.cmu.edu. 
● 
Collaboration Policy. Students are encouraged to talk to each other, to the T.A.(s), to the instructor, or to 
anyone else about any of the homework assignments. Any assistance, though, must be limited to 
discussion of the problem and sketching general approaches to a solution. Each student must write 
out their own solutions to the homework. Consulting another student’s solution is prohibited and 
submitted solutions may not be copied from any source. These and any other form of collaboration 
on assignments constitute cheating. Any form of collaboration is strictly prohibited on the quizzes and is 
considered cheating. If you have any question about whether some activity would constitute cheating, 
please feel free to ask. Cheating on an assignment/exam will result in failure of the course, and the 
university administration (department, college) will be notiﬁed per the appropriate procedures. 
Simply stated, feel free to discuss problems with each other, but do not cheat. It is not worth it, and you will 
get caught. 
Since the class allows for high-level discussions among students and to be clear we will provide examples 
below of what is/isn’t High-level discussion. When in doubt about whether a discussion is allowed or not, 
please reach out to the instructor and/or the TAs.  
The following are examples for what is considered high-level discussion:  
● 
Mentioning/explaining GENERAL syntax. For example, how to “pipe” between C and a python 
program.  
● 
Explaining Unix/Linux commands 
● 
Mentioning/explaining a good tool for debugging  
● 
Explaining the content from the book/lecture 
● 
Providing websites for tutorials or general information that would enhance everyone understanding  
● 
Sharing hints that originally came from TAs (TAs provide hints in recitations, office hours or campus 
wire.) 
 
The following are examples for what is NOT considered high-level discussion and will result in an