1 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-340/18-640: Hardware Arithmetic for Machine Learning 
Fall 2024 
 
Instructor: Prof. Shawn Blanton, HH2109, rblanton@andrew.cmu.edu, 412.268.2987 
Course Academic Services: ece-asc@andrew.cmu.edu, 1113 Hamerschlag Hall. 
Office Hours ZOOM:  Use this ZOOM URL for Prof. Blanton’s office hours.  
Live session and Recitation: 11:00am-12:20pm, Wednesday and Friday. 
Course Location: Wean Hall, Room 5421 
Classroom ZOOM: Use this ZOOM URL for Wednesday and Friday classroom sessions. 
Canvas Site: All course materials can be found on the course canvas site. 
Gradescope: Assignments will be collected and returned using our Gradescope site.  
Piazza: For course related discussions, questions and answers we will use piazza. Connect to 
our piazza page here.  
 
 
Name 
Shawn Blanton 
Prabhu Vellaisamy 
Ruben Purdy 
Cassie Pfannenstiel 
 
 
Mug 
Shots 
 
 
 
Office 
Hours 
Virtually any time 
(just email me) 
Wednesday 
2pm – 4pm 
Tuesday 
3pm – 5pm 
M - F 
8:30am – 5:00pm 
Where 
ZOOM 
HH 1308 
HH 1308 
HH 1113 
Email 
rblanton@andrew 
pvellais@andrew 
rpurdy@andrew cpfannen@andrew 
 
Number of Units: 12 
 
Course prerequisites: 
Course in logic design (18-240 or equivalent). Students should also be familiar with computer 
organization and have the capability to understand and use the System Verilog design language. 
 
Prerequisite for: 18-447, 18-525, 18-540, 18-745, 18-765 
Undergraduate Course Designation: Breadth, Coverage 
Undergraduate Course Area: Computer Hardware 
 
Textbook: 
The textbook for this course is titled Computer Arithmetic: Algorithms and Hardware Designs, 2nd 
Edition authored by Behrooz Parharmi and published by Oxford Press. In addition, extra materials will 
be made available to supplement the textbook, especially those not covered by Parharmi. 
 
 

2 
 
 
Course Description: 
In this course, students explore the techniques for designing high-performance digital circuits for 
computation along with methods for evaluating their characteristics. We begin by reviewing number 
systems and digital arithmetic along with basic arithmetic circuits such as ripple-carry adders. From 
there, we move to more complex adders (carry-look- ahead, carry-skip, carry-bypass, etc.), multipliers, 
dividers, and floating-point units. For each circuit introduced, we will develop techniques and present 
theory for evaluating their functionality and speed. Other methods will be described for analyzing a 
circuit's power consumption, testability, silicon area requirements, correctness, and cost. In addition, 
we will utilize various CAD tools to evaluate the circuits described. Finally, advanced timing and 
clocking concepts will be investigated. For example, the notion of clock skew will be introduced and 
its impact on clock period for sequential circuits will be analyzed. We will also learn how to analyze 
and design asynchronous circuits, a class of sequential circuits that do not utilize a clock signal. All 
course projects (except project 0) focus on key arithmetic aspects of various machine learning 
algorithms including: K-nearest neighbors, neural networks, decision trees, and support vector 
machines. The course also features guest speakers from both industry and academia; these are experts 
in their respective fields that will provide insight on the state-of-the-art related to the foundational 
topics covered in the course.  
 
Grading: 
Grades will be assigned based on the following assignments*: 
a) Three exams and a final exam – 20% total 
b) Seven homework assignments – 30% total 
c) Lecture Quizzes – 5% total 
d) FCE Evaluation Completion – 3% total 
e) Attendance – 2% total (80% or better attendance receives the full 2%) 
f) Mini projects for each student – 40% total 
*Your lowest exam score and homework score will be dropped from grade consideration. Lecture quizzes 
are graded liberally, that is, getting most answers right earns 100%.  
 
Course Calendar: See the course canvas site for the detailed course schedule.  
 
Gradescope:  
In this course, we will be using Gradescope (a tool accessed through our Canvas course) to grade and 
provide feedback on assignments and exams. This will allow your graders to provide more timely and 
effective feedback. It also promotes fairer grading practices by facilitating anonymous grading and 
question-by-question (rather than student-by-student) grading. In addition, Gradescope makes it easy 
for you to access and review all your (graded) work. Our link to Gradescope is here. 
 
During the semester, students will use Gradescope to (a) submit work online, (b) view feedback and 
scores on graded work, and (c) make a re-grade request within prescribed guidelines. To access 
Gradescope, simply log on to our course’s Canvas site and click on the Gradescope assignment(s) link. 
 
This website (www.cmu.edu/teaching/gradescope/) provides students with more information on 
using Gradescope, including how to scan assignments via your mobile device, where to find 
copier/scanners around campus, and how to submit assignments online to Gradescope.  
 
Note: A key step in submitting your work to Gradescope is getting a high-quality scan (i.e., digitized 
version) of your work. Be sure to take the following important policies and procedures into account 
whenever you are submitting work to Gradescope:  
 
• 
If you are writing your assignment by hand (on paper), be sure to use a dark pencil or pen, and 
write clearly! 

3 
 
• 
When you upload your work to Gradescope, be sure to (a) indicate where each question is 
located within your submission via the click-and-select Gradescope interface and (b) after you 
submit, review each page of your uploaded submission to make sure everything is clear and 
legible. 
• 
Give yourself some extra time to prepare and submit your assignment online to Gradescope, 
especially for the first few assignments when you are still getting familiar with it. (See 
“Assignment 0”: it is designed to give you a chance to practice a successful Gradescope 
submission workflow you can use throughout the semester.)  
• 
Keep a soft copy of each scanned assignment for your records. 
• 
Technical issues related to Gradescope, email: canvas-help@andrew.cmu.edu. 
• 
Important grading policy: If the grader cannot read your submission, there is no way to award 
points, so the default grade will be 0. 
 
Grace Days: Each student is issued 5 grace days. A grace day is a 24-hour period that provides grace 
on late homework assignments or projects. In other words, if you employ a grace day, there will be no 
late penalty applied. You can use the 5 days any way you like. For example, you can apply all 5 days to 
one assignment, or one day each to 5 different assignments. Grace days cannot be split however and 
thus must be used in whole-day increments. This means even if you an hour late, and you decide to 
use a grace day, then you must use an entire day. Finally, to use a grace day, you must inform us within 
24 hours of turning in your late assignment. This means using grace days later in the semester for 
already turned-in assignments is not allowed. 
 
Cheating 
Don’t do it. Any and all students involved with copying homework, design projects, or exams will (in 
the least) receive no credit for that assignment. Harsher penalties are possible and left to the discretion 
of the instructor and may include course failure. All infractions are reported to the department, college 
and university, and dropping the course prior to or after an infraction is discovered is NOT allowed 
without the explicit permission from the instructor. Code comparison software will be used to compare 
designs for similarities. Bottom-line: Please do you own work and do not collaborate. 
• Extensions: Don’t ask. None will be given, especially in light of the grace days provided. 
Exceptions only for legitimate circumstances. For e.g., a job interview is not a legitimate reason 
for an extension. 
• Late Assignments: 10 points deduction per day (weekend days count). 
• Grading Appeals: If you believe there is a mistake in grading of any assignment, then bring it to 
our attention so that we correct. Grade appeal requests must be submitted in writing within one 
week of receiving back the graded assignment. Appeals may be made using Gradescope or Piazza 
(in a private post). 
• Re-scheduling: Don’t ask. No requests to take exams early or late will be granted to accommodate 
personal schedules, interviews, etc. 
 
Accommodations for Students with Disabilities 
If you have a disability and are registered with the Oﬃce of Disability Resources, please come and talk 
to me to discuss your needs.  You will also need to use the online system to formally notify me of your 
accommodations. I will work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate. 
 
If you suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from accommodations but are not yet 
registered with the Oﬃce of Disability Resources, contact them at access@andrew.cmu.edu. 
 
Your Health and Well Being 
Things at CMU can get stressful at times. Please remember to take good care of yourself! Now more 
than ever, with the additional sources of stress this semester, it is important for you to stay healthy, 
and to reach out to your support network and to other resources that can help you when things start 
feeling difficult. Know that you are not alone - all of us can feel overwhelmed at times (especially at a 

4 
 
time like this), and all of us benefit from help and support during those times. Even though some of 
you are away from campus, there are still several resources that we encourage you to make use of if 
you are going through any sort of struggle. Sometimes, even if you don't think that you need it, or that 
it’s not serious enough to warrant reaching out, you may be surprised at how friends, family, course 
staff, and professionals can help you - consider reaching out to any of them you trust for help, or to get 
connected to resources that can provide the help you could use. An excellent resource at CMU is 
Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) - they are excellent listeners, and can help you through 
a wide variety of situations (including ones that many of you may not consider when you hear the 
terms counseling and psychology). CaPS is available for students on and off campus, and can help you 
with situations such as academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings such as anxiety or depression.  
 
Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS)  
https://www.cmu.edu/counseling/ 
(412) 268-2922 
 
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call someone immediately, 
day or night: 
 
CaPS: (412) 268-2922,  
Resolve Crisis Network: (888) 796-8226 
 
If the situation is life threatening, call the police: 
On campus: CMU Police: (412) 268-2323 
Off campus: 911  
 
Finally, if you have any questions about this, or would like to talk, please do not hesitate to reach out 
to one of us. 
 
Diversity and Inclusion 
The ways we are diverse are many and are critical to excellence and an inclusive community. They include but 
are not limited to: race, color, national origin, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, 
creed, ancestry, belief, veteran status, or genetic information. We at CMU, will work to promote diversity, 
equity, and inclusion because it is just and necessary for innovation.  Therefore, while we are imperfect, we 
will work inside and outside of our classrooms, to increase our commitment to build and sustain a community 
that embraces these values. 
 
It is the responsibility of each of us to create a safer and more inclusive environment. Bias incidents, whether 
intentional or unintentional in their occurrence, contribute to creating an unwelcoming environment for 
individuals and groups at the university. If you experience or observe unfair or hostile treatment on the basis 
of identity, we encourage you to speak out for justice and support in the moment and and/or share your 
experience anonymously using the following resources: 
 
Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion: 
csdi@andrew.cmu.edu 
(412) 268-2150 
www.cmu.edu/student-diversity  
 
Report-It online anonymous reporting platform: 
www.reportit.net 
username: tartans 
password: plaid 
 
All reports will be acknowledged, documented and a determination will be made regarding a course of action.” 

5 
 
All experiences shared will be used to transform the campus climate.  As someone who served as Associate 
Dean and Vice Provost of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion, feel welcome to speak with me as well. 
 
Education Objectives 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education. ABET defines seven 
Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the courses you successfully complete. The 
following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 18-340 and in what manner they are fulfilled. 
Note, 18-640 is not included here because ABET focuses on undergraduate education only. The objectives 
are numbered from “1” through “7” in the standard ABET parlance. The objectives not fulfilled by 18-340 
have been omitted from the following list. 
 
(1) An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying 
principles of engineering, science, and mathematics:  The course requires students to complete 
homework, quizzes, exams and sophisticated design projects. All of these assignments required the 
aforementioned skills. 
 
(2) An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with 
consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, 
environmental, and economic factors: Students are required to complete sophisticated digital designs 
that meet performance and cost goals. Consequently, some manufacturability and economic factors to 
digital design are discussed.  
 
(3) An ability to communicate eﬀectively with a range of audiences: Homework requires students to 
present their solutions in a clear and concise manner. Project reports also exercises their ability to clearly 
communicate to course staff. Oral communication is required among students, with course staff and 
formally in the presentation of their final project to the entire class.  
 
(6) An ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, 
and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions: These abilities are absolutely necessary for 
creating test-benches for the project designs. Test-benches produce data that must be analyzed and 
interpreted in order to remove design bugs, and to ensure correct functionality. 
 
ECE