1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18655: Entrepreneurial Engineering Project   
Spring 2025 
 
 
Instructor: Stephan Mueller  
Office Location:  N/A 
Email Address: sm65@andrew.cmu.edu   
Office Hours: email for mtg  
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html 
 
 
Education Objective 
In this introductory course, we cover the basics of innovation and starting and building a new venture from 
scratch. The course will focus on entrepreneurship as a response to marketplace problems through innovative 
solutions and processes. The mission of the course is three pronged: 
1. Understand Customer Discovery and Business Modeling 
2. Obtain the skill set to innovate and start a new venture including the abilities to: 
a. Apply the scientific method to entrepreneurial ventures 
b. Develop offerings that are valuable to stakeholders and customers 
c. Describe a marketplace problem and viable solution in a brief, compelling way, and explain its 
market potential 
d. Attract paying customers to new ventures and build value 
e. Work in multidisciplinary teams 
f. Understand sources of funding and present investment opportunities to investors 
3. Stimulate self-evaluation for career direction 
 
Course Description:  
This course is designed to stimulate and encourage entrepreneurship and innovation among technical students. 
The course assumes no background in business and is appropriate for those who are interested in bringing 
innovations to market. The course provides an overview of entrepreneurship and innovation, develops the 
entrepreneurial frame of mind, and provides a framework for learning the rudiments of how to generate ideas 
and implement them along the commercialization path to reality. Students come up with ideas that are responses 
to real world problems. They learn how to develop these ideas into opportunities and to explore their potential 
for becoming viable businesses. They learn how to conduct meaningful market research, develop a go-to-market 
strategy, articulate the value proposition for customers, protect the intellectual property, and differentiate their 

 
2 
 
products or services from competitors. The focus is on understanding and developing strategies for approaching 
the key elements of the entrepreneurial process – opportunity, resources and team.  
 
The course consists of a balance of lectures, interactive exercises, discussions, and guest speakers. Students are 
exposed to market, financial and intellectual property issues, and encounter a real-world perspective on 
entrepreneurship, innovation and leadership. The output of the course is a “pitch deck” for a new venture based 
on an original innovation. This is a great course in which to explore ideas you may have for a startup and find 
out if they are viable in the real world. 
 
This class is likely to be entirely different than other classes that you have taken. It is more about experiential 
learning. In a sense it is a “real world” application of academic business courses. It requires creative and 
innovative thinking, and promotes a different way of viewing opportunity. The course is time-consuming 
because of the nature of entrepreneurship, but one that you should truly enjoy. It should positively affect your 
life and career. Accordingly, grading is a little less quantitative than typical courses – in many cases there is not 
a “right” or a “wrong” answer. Please be patient with this. 
 
Number of Units: 12  
 
Pre-requisites: None  
 
Graduate Area: Entrepreneurship  
 
Suggested Reading: See CANVAS  
 
Reference Materials: See CANVAS  
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: 
What is entrepreneurship and who are entrepreneurs? 
 Idea generation and meeting a market need (problem and solution) 
 Customer discovery and market research (stakeholders, customers, benefits) 
 Competitive analysis, barriers and competitive advantages (competition and differentiation) 
 Pitching 
 Financial model 
 Funding options for startups 
 Team building 
 Minimal viable product (MVP) 
 
Working with me: 
   Attendance:  
Class attendance and active participation are essential in this course. Everyone’s 
experience will be richer if you ask questions and provide constructive feedback to your 
peers. No questions are too basic; no questions are stupid. Curiosity drives innovation! 
   Group projects: 
There will be class time to work on your projects; however, much of the group work will 
need to be done outside of class time. You are expected to be prepared to present your 
projects regularly in class. 
   Your computers: 
DO NOT WORK ON HOMEWORK FOR ANOTHER CLASS OR OTHER WORK ON 
YOUR COMUPUTER DURING CLASS TIME. 

 
3 
 
Course Canvas:  
Canvas login page: https://canvas.cmu.edu/courses/44513 You should check the course Canvas daily for 
announcements and handouts.  
 
Grading Algorithm:  
 
 
 
Tentative Course Calendar:  
 
 
 
ECE