18-469D/18-669D - Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
Course Syllabus 
 
Description 
 
This course introduces students to fabrication of microelectronics by working on a 
hands-on, collaborative, open source project: the Hacker Fab. Topics include layer 
deposition, patterning, oxidation, etching, doping, inspection, metrology, 
dynamics/motion control, vacuum, optics, material selection, and plasmas. Students 
spend the majority of the class working together to design new fab tools, processes, 
and microelectronic devices all the way from idea to implementation in order to expand 
the capabilities of the Hacker Fab. Five labs in the first half of the semester familiarize 
students with equipment and culminate in all students making transistors. Lectures 
serve to bridge the gap between the theoretical understanding gained from textbook 
readings and the practical understanding from lab assignments. Lecture times are also 
for sharing progress and coordinating efforts. 
 
Units: 12 
Pre-requisites: None ​
 
Lectures: 7:00-8:50 PM, Tuesday/Thursday, SH 234 
 
Brief List of Topics Covered 
Layer deposition, patterning, oxidation, etching, doping, inspection, metrology, 
dynamics/motion control, vacuum, optics, material selection, robotics, RF, plasma 
 
Required Textbooks 
●​ Microchip Fabrication, Peter Van Zant, 6th edition 
●​ Integrated Circuit Fabrication, Plummer and Griffin 
 
Suggested Reading 
●​ Building Scientific Apparatus, John H Moore 
●​ For fun illustrations: The Way Things Work Now, David Macaulay 
 
Reference Materials 
●​ Sam Zeloof’s YouTube Channel 
●​ Open Source Software vs. Hardware 
●​ Essays about Linux and Open Source 
●​ https://pseudodudo.com/research
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
Staff 
 
Head TA 
●​ Jay Kunselman (jskunsel), Deposition + CMOS + Sputtering Process 
 
TAs (Project + Lab Leads) 
●​ Anirud Vineet Durani (adurani), Lab Automation + Metrology 
●​ Rahim Malik (rahimm), Sputtering Controls + Plasma Etcher 
●​ Cesely Smith (ceselys), CMOS + Novel Devices 
●​ Viswesh Prakash (visweshp), ALD 
●​ Joe Luo (jiangtia), Litho Tools 
●​ Daniel Yin (djyin), Electroless Plating 
 
RAs (Project Leads) 
●​ Jessica Wu (jwu5), Lab Automation 
●​ Callum Bagnall (cbagnall), Lab Automation 
●​ David Hershenson (dhershen), Lab Automation (Spin Coater) 
●​ Marina Wang (marinaw), Sputtering Build + Plasma Etcher 
●​ Carson Swoveland (cswovela), Litho Tools 
●​ Akshunna Vaishnav (avaishna), Database 
 
Lab Staff 
●​ Joel Gonzalez (bgonzale), Lithography + Deposition + Metrology + Novel Devices 
●​ Yanbing Icey Chen (yanbing2), CMOS + PDK + Novel Devices 
●​ J. Kent Wirant (jwirant), Litho Tools 
 
All Staff: hackerfab-tas@andrew.cmu.edu​
 
 
Faculty Instructors 
●​ Dr. Matt Moneck (mmoneck), SCOT 4S407 
●​ Prof. Tathagata Srimani (tsrimani), HH 2124 
 
Office Location 
●​ Hacker Fab Lab (REH 202/204) 
●​ REH 203 
 
Office Hours 
●​ TAs:  5:00-7:00 PM, Monday/Tuesday/Wednesday/Thursday 
●​ Dr. Moneck:  5:00-6:00 PM Monday/Wednesday 
●​ Prof. Srimani:  TBA 
●​ Or reach out to specific TA/RA to schedule an appointment 
●​ Or post in Discord server #general-cmu for course-related questions 
 
Course Support 
●​ Academic Services Center, HH 1113 
●​ https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.htm 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
Time Commitment 
 
The following durations pertain to synchronous class time only, which includes: 
 
1.​ 2 lectures per week, 1 hour 50 minutes each. Total 4 hours. 
2.​ 1 lab session per week, about 3 hours. First half of semester only. 
3.​ 1 scheduled project work session with your team, about 1 hour, but does not 
include individual project work outside of this meeting. Increases in the 
second half of the semester once labs are completed. 
 
Lectures 
 
The lectures in this class are multipurpose. The primary uses of this time together 
are listed below. The semester will start with more instruction, but as students delve 
into their projects, progress presentations and work sessions will start to take up 
more lecture time. 
 
Instruction 
 
For the first seven weeks, lectures start with one hour of instruction connecting 
textbook content to the labs, covering each fabrication process in detail. This 
includes explanation of the physical phenomena occurring and the parameters that 
determine the outcomes, discussion of the design and operation of the instruments 
for that process, and comparing variations of equipment in terms of precision, 
throughput, safety, and cost. 
 
Faculty Check Ins 
 
Approximately once a week, The Professors will spend ~5 minutes checking in with 
each project, and giving advice or administrative assistance. These are intended to 
occur during or after lecture. 
 
Work Sessions 
 
If project teams would benefit from additional time working together, the lecture 
hall can be split into groups working separately. Since everyone is in the same room, 
it becomes easier to deal with interdependencies between teams. 
 
Guest Lectures 
 
From CMU faculty or industry experts on relevant topics, including the current 
semiconductor industry, advanced devices, novel fabrication techniques, and data 
management. 
 
Project Presentations/Demos 
 
See section: Projects > Demos 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
Readings 
 
Semiconductor fabrication has been in existence for half a century, which means 
people have had time to write good textbooks about it. The readings are selected to 
teach the impact of each knob in our process, avoiding extraneous topics. Lectures 
will bridge the textbook theory to the practical labs. See the calendar below for the 
readings. 
 
Projects 
 
Building and operating a semiconductor fab is an incredibly rich educational 
experience for students in many disciplines. Students will work solo or in teams to 
accomplish goals like building a new tool from scratch or developing a new process. 
Instructors will help by breaking down technical goals into manageable chunks and 
assigning them to students in accordance with their interests and abilities. Projects 
are decided before each semester begins.  
 
Project teams will need to schedule times to build equipment or run experiments. 
The people, places, and times may change throughout the semester as projects 
start and finish, but there will always be a weekly core meeting for each project 
listed above to plan work. Students are expected to come to the lab outside of 
scheduled times to complete tasks as needed. 
 
Platforms 
 
Canvas  
 
All assignment submissions, grading, and feedback will be conducted through the 
18469/18669 Canvas course you are enrolled in via SIO registration. 
 
Google Drive 
 
Resources pertaining to course material such as rubrics, lecture slides, lab reports 
will be available in the Hacker Fab Students Shared Drive. This drive is shared with 
you through the Hacker Fab student email group upon registration. 
 
The student drive is distinct from the global Hacker Fab shared drive used by all 
fabs for project work and supplemental resources. You are expected to keep all 
project work in the appropriate folder within that drive and not the student folder. 
This ensures other fabs across the world have constant access to your research, and 
so that you can benefit from theirs. 
 
 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
Github 
 
You will be expected to use your project’s Github project tracker within the Hacker 
Fab organization for managing tasks and keeping up with tasks your TA might 
update based on the content of your weekly update. You will be added to the Github 
organization during your first project team meeting. 
 
Code repositories, source control, and pull requests will also be conducted through 
Github for software projects. 
 
Gitbook 
 
Gitbook is another shared Hacker Fab platform used for published documentation 
and weekly updates. You can find past work, often more polished than working 
documents present in the Hacker Fab shared drive. You will be added to the Github 
organization during your first project team meeting. 
 
Fabublox 
 
For labs and process development projects, nanofabrication workflows will be 
visually curated in Fabublox for your convenience. Process workflows will also be 
documented in Gitbook, a lab report, or a shared drive working document. You can 
create your own login or use Google authentication on the website. 
 
Hacker Fab Database 
 
As part of an ongoing project, Hacker Fab has deployed a simple database for 
logging and retrieving process related parameters for its chips. You can create your 
own login on the website. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
Laboratory Safety 
 
The nature of the work that takes place in the Hacker Fab necessitates a culture of 
safety.  Labs and some project work will include the use of hazardous chemicals and 
gases, high temperature, and vacuum.  Individual projects may also include work 
with soldering, 3D printing, high voltages, and mechanical processes, all of which 
present their own unique safety concerns.   
 
In order to promote a culture of safety, everyone working in Hacker Fab labs will be 
required to wear PPE at all times (includes at minimum a lab coat and safety 
glasses).  Everyone will also be required to take the following in-person 
Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) courses as part of the course curriculum:: 
 
●​ Laboratory Safety 
●​ Hazardous Waste 
●​ Hydrofluoric Acid Training 
 
Students are required to complete all safety training within the first month of the 
class.  Training will be managed through the EHS SciShield software platform .  
Sign-ups can be found through SciShield at the links for each bulleted course topic 
above (please note that if a training time you desire is listed as full it is worth 
showing up anyway, as there are often no-shows and extra seats despite what the 
online scheduler indicates).   
 
Please see our Safety Guidelines document for a thorough list of trainings to 
complete. 
 
Everyone is also required to read and understand the Safety Data Sheets (SDS) for 
each chemical or gas you are working with for your project or lab.  Those sheets can 
be accessed through Velocity EHS on the EHS website.  It is also recommended that 
everyone review the University’s Chemical Hygiene Plan for additional information.  
 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
Grading Scheme 
 
Final 
35% ​Documentation 
5% ​ Proposal 
10%​ Mid-Semester Documentation 
20% ​Final Documentation 
25%​ Gitbook Updates (14 total) 
20%​ Presentations (3 total) 
15%​ Labs (2 reports total) 
5%​ Participation 
 
Mid-Semester 
35% ​Documentation 
5% ​ Proposal 
30%​ Mid-Semester Documentation 
25%​ Gitbook Updates (5 total) 
20%​ Presentations (1 total) 
15%​ Labs (1 report total) 
5%​ Participation 
 
Documentation (35%) 
 
The Hacker Fab is an open source project - others must be able to replicate 
students’ work, and every student is expected to create high-quality documentation. 
Students will be graded on their contributions to this documentation, and given 
feedback. The goal of this is to directly link the performance of the students in 
18469/18669 with the acceleration of the Hacker Fab. 
 
There will be three documentation assignments throughout the semester. The first 
will be a project proposal you will assemble and later modify with your project TA to 
establish a concrete plan for the semester. The second will be a mid-semester 
documentation focused on consolidating the research and design decisions you 
have made to make the final documentation much easier. The final documentation 
will be a culmination of your project work and intended for Gitbook publication. 
Depending on the project, these will either be done individually or as a group, but 
you will be graded on your individual work regardless. 
 
Instructions and Rubrics 
●​ Machine Build Rubric 
●​ Software Dev Rubric 
●​ Process Dev Rubric 
 
 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
Gitbook Updates (25%) 
 
To facilitate documentation to allow students in other universities to follow our 
progress, students will post short weekly summaries of their progress on Gitbook. 
These submissions will be graded from 0-5 on Canvas with written feedback. 
Updates are due every Sunday at 11:59 PM. 
 
Instructions and Rubric 
●​ Weekly Update Rubric 
 
Presentations (20%) 
 
Three times during the semester, each student will present to the rest of the class 
and potential outside guests. The demo takes two forms: a working demonstration 
of your project milestone, and a slide deck detailing your work. The presentation 
should demonstrate the relevance of the work to larger Hacker Fab goals. 
 
These may be group assignments, so if students worked together on a project, then 
they should present together, with each student only presenting their own work. 
These will be graded individually based on the progress made and how well it is 
presented. Students should reach out to course staff if they have any questions 
about the content, format, scheduling, or anything else about the presentations. 
 
The schedule for demos can be found on the Tentative Course Calendar in this 
syllabus. Demos will take place during regular lecture time, and they may be split 
over two days to accommodate the number of students presenting that week. 
 
Instructions and Rubric 
●​ Demo Rubric 
 
Bonus: Video Demonstration 
 
If you create a video that clearly showcases your working demo, you will receive up 
to 5 bonus points. This does not have to be extremely high production value, but 
should include at minimum: 
 
●​ Multiple clips edited together. 
●​ Show details that are not immediately apparent in the short demo you made 
to the class. 
●​ For process development demos: you can make a video detailing the timeline 
of discovering and testing your new technique. This should provide more 
information so that viewers know what you already debugged, and it puts 
the process in context against alternatives. 
 
 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
Labs (15%) 
 
The labs are designed to familiarize students with the equipment in the Hacker Fab 
and impart a physical understanding of fabrication processes. These labs are not a 
large portion of the class, and serve to aid students’ understanding for their 
individual projects. Later labs will build off of previous ones so that students end up 
with functioning devices by the end. 
 
Process control is extremely important to fabricate good devices, but doing so in 
practice is difficult. Students will experience defects and failures throughout 
fabrication, and the lab reports encourage the analysis of these outcomes rather 
than being entirely based on results. 
 
Labs are conducted in a group setting. At the beginning of the semester, students 
will be assigned a three-hour lab session based on their availability. Students will 
use this weekly lab session to complete the labs under the guidance of the TAs. 
Students should communicate with the course staff if they need to miss their 
scheduled lab session, so that they may join another session to make up the work. 
 
The deliverables for each lab include: 
1.​ The data and analysis sections, to be graded for completion.  
2.​ Report questions. 
 
Instructions and Rubric 
●​ Lab Report Rubric 
 
Participation (5%) 
 
Attendance is mandatory at all lectures, labs, and project meetings. Notify your 
project TA ahead of time if you are unable to attend something in order to make it 
up. More than attendance, we expect students to ask questions in lectures, give 
feedback for other student’s presentations, show enthusiasm in your own 
presentations, help teammates out in labs, question the process in labs, take 
initiative in project meetings, brainstorm creative strategies for solving issues in 
your project and other student’s projects, and generally be engaged with other 
students and staff. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
Tentative Course Calendar 
 
Week 
Date 
Reading 
Lecture 
Lab 
January 
1 
Tue 14 
PVZ ch 4 (fab overview) 
+ Filling in the Gaps Doc 
Course + Project 
overview. Introduce 
Hacker Fab process 
and project goals. 
No Lab - sign up for 
EHS sessions. 
Thu 16 
PVZ ch 8 (patterning), 
ch 9 up to etch (develop 
+ bake) 
Patterning and 
Fabrication 
Processes 
2 
Tue 21 
PVZ ch 5 (Contam 
Control, skip cleanroom 
design) 
Plummer 11.3.2 
Semiconductors, 
Doping and 
Diffusion 
 
Thu 23 
Plummer 9.1 to 9.5.3 
(plasma etch) 
PVZ ch 9 Overertch and 
Undercutting 
Etching Processes 
3 
Tue 28 
PVZ Ch 7 up to p 167 
PVZ ch 11 up to 338 
Overview of 
Deposition Methods 
Resistor Lab Part 1 
(Spin on Dopant + 
Diffusion + Wet Etch) 
Thu 30 
PVZ ch 13 Deposition 
Methods 
Sputter Deposition 
February 
4 
Tue 4 
PVZ ch 13 Deposition 
Methods 
Atomic Layer 
Deposition 
Resistor Lab Part 2 
(Thermal Evaporation) 
 
Thu 6 
 
Metrology & 
Characterization 
5 
Tue 11 
 
Electrical Testing 1 
Resistor Lab Part 3 
(Patterning + Wet 
Etch) 
Thu 13 
 
Electrical Testing 2 
6 
Tue 18 
 
Presentation 1 
Resistor Lab Part 4 
(Probe Station) 
Thu 20 
 
Presentation 1 
7 
Tue 25 
 
TBD 
MOSCap Lab Part 1 
(Oxide Growth) 
 
Resistor Lab Due 
Thursday night 
Thu 27 
 
TBD 
Fri 28 
 
Mid-Semester 
Documentation Due 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
March 
NA 
Tue 4 
 
Spring Break 
(No Classes!) 
  
Thu 6 
 
Spring Break 
(No Classes!) 
8 
Tue 10 
 
TBD 
MOSCap Lab Part 2 
(Thermal Evaporation) 
Thu 13 
 
TBD 
9 
Tue 15 
 
TBD 
MOSCap Lab Part 3 
(Patterning + Wet 
Etch) 
Thu 20 
 
TBD 
10 
Tue 25 
 
Presentation 2 
MOSCap Lab Part 4 
(Probe Station) 
Tue 27 
 
Presentation 2 
April 
11 
Tue 1 
 
TBD 
MOSCap Lab due 
Tuesday night 
Thu 3 
 
Carnival 
(No Classes!) 
 
12 
Tue 8 
 
TBD 
 
Thu 10 
 
TBD 
13 
Tue 15 
 
TBD 
 
Thu 17 
 
TBD 
14 
Tue 22 
 
TBD 
 
Thu 24 
 
TBD 
May 
 
TBD 
(Finals Week) 
 
Final Presentations 
+ Final 
Documentation Due 
 
 
 
 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
Education Objectives  
​
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education.  
ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the 
courses you take. The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by this 
course and in what manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” 
through “7” in the standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this 
course have been omitted from the following list: 
 
1.​ an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics 
a.​ This course asks students to implement an extremely broad range of 
engineering topics included in the semiconductor fabrication industry: 
mechanical, electrical, material, and software engineering. 
2.​ an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet 
specified needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as 
well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors 
a.​ There are specific technical requirements for each project in this 
course that students must not only adhere to, but also document their 
findings in order to share with the public. This practice of open 
documentation directly supports the need for semiconductor 
workforce education by lowering the barrier to entry for others outside 
of the course to understand these complex concepts. 
3.​ an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences 
a.​ Beyond working amongst other students in the class to complete 
collaborative projects, the entire class focuses on pushing the 
open-source Hacker Fab project forward. Documentation created by 
students is for audiences ranging from other high end academic 
institutions, the semiconductor fabrication industry, community 
colleges, and the general public. 
4.​ an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering 
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of 
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal 
contexts 
a.​ From day one till the end of the class, students think of solutions to 
lower the barrier to entry of semiconductor fabrication.  
5.​ an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, 
plan tasks, and meet objectives 
a.​ Students work in groups of 2-4 people in order to tackle projects all 
the way from ideation to implementation.  
6.​ an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions  
a.​ Laboratory exercises provide for the opportunity to conduct 
experiments. Students will design experiments and analyze data with 
a wide range of metrology tools. 
 
Carnegie Mellon University​
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 

18-469D/18-669D Hacker Fab ​
Spring 2025 
 
7.​ an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies. 
a.​ During intermittent design reviews and demos, students will do 
extensive literature review to determine what is worth working on, and 
what to change going forward. The course and project structure is 
conducive to fast moving and iteration of projects that require new 
knowledge. 
 
Hacker Fab Generative AI Policy* 
 
Generative AI tools, such as ChatGPT, are encouraged as supplemental resources to 
support your learning and creativity in this course. These tools can assist with 
brainstorming, generating ideas, clarifying concepts, and solving problems. 
However, their use requires critical thinking and responsibility. While AI can provide 
helpful suggestions, it may also produce inaccurate, incomplete, or misleading 
information. It is your responsibility to verify all outputs against reliable sources 
such as textbooks, academic papers, official documentation, or empirical evidence. 
 
When using generative AI tools in your work, you must justify your decisions based 
on solid evidence rather than the perceived credibility of the tool. Any outputs 
integrated into your assignments, projects, or designs must be accompanied by 
appropriate reasoning, research, or supporting data. Generative AI is a valuable 
resource to enhance creativity and efficiency, but it should complement—not 
replace—your understanding, analysis, and intellectual effort. Your final submissions 
should reflect a thoughtful combination of AI-assisted insights and independent 
critical thinking. 
 
*This policy was made with ChatGPT. 
 
ECE