1 
                                                                                                                       
Course Syllabus 
18469/18669/42693 
Special Topics in Integrated Systems Technology: Micro/Nano Biomedical Devices 
Fall 2024 
 
 
Instructor: 
 
 
Siyang Zheng 
Office Location: 
 
Scott Hall 4N211 
Email Address: 
 
siyangzheng@cmu.edu    
Office/recitation Hours: 
TBD 
Zoom:   
 
 
TBD 
 
Teaching Assistants:  
Abbas Jalili 
 
 
 
Email Address: 
 
ajalili@andrew.cmu.edu  
 
  
Office/recitation Hours: 
TBD  
Zoom:  
 
 
TBD 
 
 
 
 
Course Description: Biomedical devices constantly call for innovations. Micro/nano fabrication 
not only miniaturizes devices and instruments, but also can enable new biomedical devices and 
significantly boost device performance. This course introduces design principles of various 
biomedical devices, fundamental micro/nano fabrication technologies and related materials of 
biomedical devices, and prominent examples of such devices. Both diagnostic and therapeutic 
devices will be discussed, including bioelectrodes, neural probes/stimulators, prothetic devices, 
medical implants, point-of-care diagnostic devices, biosensors, DNA sequencers, prosthetic 
devices, drug delivery devices/systems, medical robots, etc. The lectures are complemented with 
simulation labs using COMSOL Multiphysics, a finite element method (FEM) software. 
 
Number of Units:  
12 
 
Pre-requisites:  
Senior or graduate standing. 
 
Undergraduate Course Area: Device Sciences and Nanofabrication 
 
Graduate Course Area: Device Sciences and Nanofabrication 

 
2 
 
 
Class Schedule: 
● Lecture:  
Tuesdays and Thursdays 
12:30 - 1:50 pm 
 
SH 234 
 
Required Textbook:  
No required textbook. Learning materials are provided as lecture notes, book chapters and 
reference papers. 
 
Reference books:  
1. 
Baura, Gail. Medical Device Technologies: A Systems Based Overview Using 
Engineering Standards, 2nd Edition. Academic Press, September 15, 2020. 
2. 
Webster, John G. (Ed), and Nimunkar, Amit J. (Ed). Medical Instrumentation: 
Application and Design, 5th Edition. Wiley, 2020. 
3. 
Bhunia, S., Majerus, S. & Sawan, M. Implantable Biomedical Microsystems Design 
Principles and Applications,  Elsevier, 2015. 
4. 
Henrik Bruus, Theoretical Microfluidics, 1st edition, Oxford University Press, 2007. 
5. 
Marc J. Madou, Fundamentals of Microfabrication and Nanotechnology, Third 
Edition, Volume I, II, III, 3rd edition, CRC press, 2011. 
6. 
Roger Pryor, Multiphysics Modeling using COMSOL 5 and MATLAB, 2nd edition, 
Mercury Learning & Information, 2022. 
 
Brief List of Topics Covered:  
● Introduction to micro/nano biomedical devices 
● Example of micro/nano biomedical technology:  
○ Sanger sequencing 
○ Illumina sequencing 
○ 3rd generation (long reads) sequencing 
○ DNA sequencing devices  
○ New technologies: methylation, chromatin access 
● COMSOL multiphysics FEM simulation  
● Bioelectrical micro/nano devices 
○ Bioeletrocity 
○ Electrodes 
○ Electrohydrodynamics 
○ Neural probes 
○ Stimulators 
○ Pacemaker 
○ Retina prothesis 
○ Cochlear implants 
● Micro/nanofluidics 
○ Flow at micro/nano scale 
○ Electrokinetic flows 
● Micro/nano fabrication 
○ Lithography 
○ Etching 
○ Deposition 
○ Polymer fabrication, soft lithography 

 
3 
 
 
Course Canvas:  
Canvas login page: https://canvas.cmu.edu. You should check the course Canvas daily for 
announcements and handouts.  
 
Online Q&A: 
Piazza Class Signup link: https://piazza.com/cmu/fall2024/186691846942693 
 
Attendance and Course Recording: 
This course is determined to be IPE (in-person) by the ECE department. “Students are expected 
to be in the classroom during the course's scheduled meeting time”. There will be ~26 lectures 
including simulation labs, midterm exam, and 3 final project presentation slots. You are allowed 
to miss a maximal of 5 times without affecting your attendance. If you miss a class, please email 
the instructor ahead of the lecture time. 
 
Grading Algorithm:  
The final grade for students registered for this course will be computed by various components in 
the following manner: 
Homework 
24% 
Simulation lab 
18% 
Mid-term exam 
30% 
Final project 
25% 
Class attendance and participation  
3% 
 
Extension and Makeup Policy: 
Submit all assignments through Canvas. Due dates are indicated on Canvas. We realize that life 
happens, so if an extension for an assignment or a make-up is needed for legitimate reasons, it 
must be arranged beforehand. Late assignments will be penalized at 10% per day and no late 
assignments will be accepted 96 hours after the due date. 
Grades: 
- The following scale will be used to assign final letter grade to all undergraduate students: 
90 to 100%  
 
A 
80 to 89.9%   
B 
70 to 79.9% 
 
C 
60 to 69.9% 
 
D 
0 to 59.9% 
 
R 
- The following scale will be used to assign a final letter grade to all graduate students: 
93 to 100% 
 
A 
90 to 92.9% 
 
A- 
87 to 89.9% 
 
B+ 
83 to 86.9% 
 
B 
80 to 82.9% 
 
B- 
77 to 79.9% 
 
C+ 
73 to 76.9% 
 
C 
70 to 72.9% 
 
C- 

 
4 
 
60 to 69.9% 
 
D 
0 to 59.9% 
 
R 
- The grades will be calculated by curving. At the end of the semester, the highest 
cumulative grade will be set as 100% and the rest calculated proportionally. 
Challenges to grades:  
- The challenges to grades will be accepted within 7 days of grade release. 
- For homework and simulation labs, please contact the instructor. 
- For mid-term exam and final exam, please contact the instructor. 
- The entire exam/assignment will be re-graded upon challenge, not just the challenged 
part. 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education.  ABET 
defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the courses you 
take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by this course and in what 
manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” through “7” in the standard 
ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course have been omitted from the 
following list: 
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying 
principles of engineering, science, and mathematics 
2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with 
consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, 
environmental, and economic factors 
6. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, 
and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions 
7. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning 
strategies. 
 
CMU