1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-460/18-660: Optimization   
Spring 2025 
 
 
Instructor: Giulia Fanti 
Office Location:  Scaife Hall 234 
Email Address: gfanti@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: TBA, CIC 2118 
 
Teaching Assistant:  
• Pedro Rocha Cachim (Email: pcachim@andrew.cmu.edu) 
• Chaoyi Pan (Email: chaoyip@andrew.cmu.edu) 
• Xingyu Xu (Email: xingyuxu@andrew.cmu.edu)  
Office Hours: TBA
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html 
 
 
Course Description: Many design problems in engineering (e.g., machine learning, 
finance, circuit design, controller, energy networks, etc.) involve minimizing (or 
maximizing) a cost (or reward) function. Optimization is the study of algorithms and 
theory for numerically solving such problems, and it underpins many of the technologies 
we use today.  
 
This course is an introduction to optimization. Students will:  
1. 
learn about common classes of optimization problems 
2. 
study and implement algorithms for solving them 
3. 
gain hands-on experience with standard optimization tools.  
 
We will focus on convex optimization problems, but will also discuss the important role 
of non-convex optimization, as well as some more general numerical methods. The 
course will emphasize connections to real-world applications including machine learning, 
networking, and cyber physical systems, etc. The course will involve lectures, homework, 
exams, and a project. 
 
 
Number of Units: 12 
 

 
2 
 
Pre-requisites: (18202) and (36219 or 36218 or 36225 or 21325 or 36217) and (21241) 
OR equivalent background material with permission of the instructor. 
 
Class Lecture: Tuesday and Thursday, 11:00AM – 12:20PM, Scaife Hall 234 
 
Recitation Session: There will be about 6 recitation sessions spaced out throughout the 
semester to help you understand the course and prepare for the tests better. Time will be 
determined via a poll.  
 
Required Textbook: No official textbook 
 
Suggested Reading:  
• Boyd and Vanderberghe, Convex Optimization (available at 
https://web.stanford.edu/~boyd/cvxbook/) 
• Nesterov, Introductory Lectures on Convex Optimization 
• Dimitri P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming 
• Bubeck, Convex Optimization: Algorithms and Complexity (available at 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.4980) 
Suggested reading materials for each lecture will be posted online.  
 
Reference Materials:  None 
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: 
• Convex functions and convex sets 
• Convex optimization problems: linear/quadratic programming, second-order 
cone programming, semi-definite programming 
• Examples of optimization in engineering 
• First-order methods: gradient descent, stochastic gradient descent, subgradient 
descent, proximal gradient descent 
• Duality theory: Lagrangian, multipliers, duality, KKT conditions 
• Special topics: nonconvex optimization 
 
Course Canvas: Canvas login page: https://cmu.instructure.com/. You should check the 
course Canvas daily for announcements and handouts.  
 
Course Website: Canvas will host all the lecture materials. In addition, all QA will be 
handled on Piazza, and all homework submission is via GradeScope.  
 
Quizzes: There will be short quizzes to be completed for each lecture. These quizzes are 
intended to make sure that you understood the material from the previous lecture. The 
quizzes will be available on Canvas after each lecture and is due before the next lecture.  
 
Homework: There will be 4 homework problem sets spaced out over the semester. The 
homework will be posted on Canvas, and completed homework will be submitted via 
GradeScope. You have five late days (total across all 4 homeworks) that can be used on 
homework, no questions asked. You can use at most 3 late days for any single 

 
3 
 
homework. For example, you can use (at most) 3 late days on HW1, which leaves you 
with 2 late days for the rest of the semester. If you have an emergency, let the instructor 
know (BEFORE the due date), and we will work something out.  
 
You may NOT copy or look at solutions to problems that you find online, from other 
students, or anywhere else (including generative AI models like ChatGPT). You may work 
with other students, but you must give them credit on your homework assignment and state 
their contribution.  
 
Tests: There will be two tests throughout the semester. These will be in-class, during the 
regular lecture slot (11:00am -12:20 pm ET).  
 
The tests will be open-book, open-notes, which means you can use all the materials within 
the course, including the lecture slides, homework, reading materials. However, you may 
NOT use electronics, including laptops or calculators (you should not need a calculator to 
complete the problems). 
 
There will be NO FINAL EXAMS.  
 
Project: There will be a final project for the course. In this project, you will explore a 
topic related to optimization in greater depth. You will work in groups of 2-3. There will 
be periodic milestones for the project. On the last day of class, there will be a session 
where students will present their projects.  
 
Difference between 18-460/18660: The two course numbers share the same lectures, but 
compared to 18-660, 18-460 has fewer homework problems, fewer exam questions, and 
less stringent criteria for the project. 
 
 
Reading Assignments: None 
 
Grading Algorithm: 
 
45% 
Homework 
25% 
Tests 
20% 
Project 
10% 
Quizzes 
 
 
 
Tentative Course Calendar:  
Week 
Date 
Day 
Class Activity 
Assignment 
 
January 
Week 1 
14 
Tue 
1 - Introduction 
 
16 
Thu 
2 - Convex functions 
Week 2 
21 
Tue 
3 - Convex functions cont’d and convex sets 
HW1 released 
23 
Thu 
4 - Convex sets cont’d 

 
4 
 
Recitation: Linear 
Algebra and 
Calculus  
Week 3 
28 
Tue 
5 - Convex optimization  
 
30 
Thu 
6 - Canonical forms of convex optimization 
Week 4 
February 
 
4 
Tue 
7 - Example of optimization in engineering (Zoom 
lecture) 
HW1 due 
6 
Thu 
8 - Example of optimization in engineering cont’d 
(Zoom lecture) 
Week 5 
11 
Tue 
9 - Gradient descent 
HW 2 released 
Recitation: CVX  
13 
Thu 
10 - Stochastic Gradient Descent 
Week 6 
18 
Tue 
11 - Subgradients 
Recitation: Test 1 
Review  
20 
Thu 
12 - Proximal gradient descent 
Week 7 
25 
Tue 
13 - Acceleration 
HW2 due 
27 
Thu 
Test 1 
 
March 
N/A 
4 
Tue 
Spring Break – No Classes 
  
6 
Thu 
Spring Break – No Classes 
Week 8 
11 
Tue 
14 - Newton’s method 
HW3 released 
13 
Thu 
15 - Duality 
Week 9 
18 
Tue 
16 - KKT Conditions 
 
20 
Thu 
17 - KKT cont’ and dual gradient method 
Week 10 
25 
Tue 
18 - Dual gradient method  cont’ 
HW3 due 
27 
Thu 
19 - Barrier method   
 
April 
Week 11 
1 
Tue 
20 - Primal-dual interior-point method   
Recitation: Test 2 
Review 
3 
Thu 
Spring Carnival – No Classes  
Week 12 
8 
Tue 
Test 2  
HW 4 released 
10 
Thu 
21 - Special topics: TBD 
Week 13 
15 
Tue 
22 - Special topics: TBD 
 
17 
Thu 
23 – Special topics: TBD 
Week 14 
22 
Tue 
Project Presentations, Part 1 
 
24 
Thu 
Project Presentations, Part 2 
 
 
 
 
HW 4 due, Project 
report due 
 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your 
education.  ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of 
all the courses you take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 
this course and in what manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” 
through “7” in the standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course 
have been omitted from the following list: 
 
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics: In particular, 
students will learn to apply tools from optimization to formulate engineering 

 
5 
 
problems (e.g., max flow in networking, power flow in power systems, optimal 
control in robotics), and learn how to use optimization algorithms to solve them. 
2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet 
specified needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as 
well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors: We will 
study this in the context of constrained optimization, which allows us to specify 
solutions to engineering problems that meet certain constraints imposed by the 
environment or societal factors. 
3. an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences: Students will 
conduct a group project and present their results in written and oral form at the 
end of the course. 
4. an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering 
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of 
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal 
contexts: We will discuss how to interpret solutions of an optimization problem, 
and how to use the solutions to make informed decisions in engineering 
situations. We will emphasize that realistic considerations (economic, 
environmental, etc) must be taken into account before applying the solutions to 
the real-world.   
5. an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, 
plan tasks, and meet objectives: The group project will exercise these skills.  
6. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions: As part of 
the project, students will need to formulate an optimization problem and solve it. 
This will involve designing numerical experiments, analyze the results, and draw 
conclusions. 
7. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies: The project will encourage students to acquire new 
knowledge on their own and conduct independent research.  
 
ECE