1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-461/18-661: Introduction to Machine Learning for Engineers   
Spring 2025
Instructor: 
 
Carlee Joe-Wong 
Office Location: 
Porter B21 (Pitt) 
Email Address: 
cjoewong@andrew.cmu.edu  
Office Hours:  
Wed 1:50 pm -3:00 pm ET, Zoom or in Person 
 
Instructor: 
 
Gauri Joshi 
Office Location: 
CIC 4119 (Pitt) 
Email Address: 
gaurij@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  
Mon 1:50 pm -3:00 pm ET, Zoom or in Person 
 
Teaching Assistants:  
Please refer to the course Piazza for information on TA office hours. 
 
Landelin Gihozo 
lgihozo@andrew.cmu.edu  
Neharika Jali 
njali@andrew.cmu.edu  
Jong-Ik Park 
jongikp@andrew.cmu.edu  
Arian Raje 
araje@andrew.cmu.edu  
Siddharth Shah 
sgshah@andrew.cmu.edu  
John Waithaka 
jwaithak@andrew.cmu.edu  
Steven Zeng 
sczeng@andrew.cmu.edu  
Course Management Assistant: Stephanie Bolla 
Email Address: ece-asc@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Course Description:  
This course provides an introduction to machine learning with a special focus on 
engineering applications. The course starts with a mathematical background required for 
machine learning and covers approaches for supervised learning (linear models, kernel 
methods, decision trees, neural networks) and unsupervised learning (clustering, 
dimensionality reduction), as well as theoretical foundations of machine learning (learning 
theory, optimization). Evaluation will consist of mathematical problem sets and 
programming projects targeting real-world engineering applications. 
 

 
 
2 
Number of Units:  
12 
 
Pre-requisites:  
18202 and 21127 and 15122 and one of {21-325, 36-225, 36-218, 
36217} or equivalent 
 
Undergraduate Course Designation: Coverage 
 
Undergraduate Course Area: Signals and Systems 
 
Class Schedule: 
● Lecture  
Pittsburgh: Monday and Wednesday, 12:00pm-1:50pm, ET, TEP3500 
Silicon Valley: Monday and Wednesday, 9:00am-10:50am, PT,  B23 118 
Rwanda: Monday and Wednesday, 7:00pm-8:50pm, CAT, CMR F205 
  
● Recitation 
Pittsburgh/Rwanda: Friday, 11:00am-12:20pm ET/6:00pm–7:20pm CAT, 
TEP3500/CMR F205 
Pittsburgh/Silicon Valley: Friday, 3:30pm-4:50pm ET/12:30pm-1:50pm PT, BH 
235B/B23 227 
 
Recitation attendance is not required but strongly encouraged. 
 
 
Required Textbook: None 
 
Suggested Reading:  
Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective, Kevin Murphy. 1st edition. 
ISBN-13: 978-0262018029 
 
Other Supplemental Materials: See the course website for lecture notes and suggested 
readings (https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-661/). We will maintain a Piazza for the 
course that can be accessed through Canvas (see instructions below). 
 
Collaboration Policy: The homeworks are structured to give you experience in both 
written mathematical exercises and programming exercises. While it is completely 
acceptable for you to collaborate with other students in order to solve the problems, your 
solution writeups should reflect your own understanding of the material. Thus, you should 
write up your own solutions and implement your own code. You must indicate on each 
homework the students with whom you collaborated.  
 
Please note that the collaboration policy also applies to using generative AI tools, such 
as ChatGPT, to complete your homework assignments. While it is acceptable to use such 
tools to access background information about your homework assignments (though we 
urge you to remember that the outputs of these tools may not be accurate), your solution 
writeups should reflect your own understanding of the material. Thus, you are not permitted 
to copy the output of these tools in your homework solutions. 
 

 
 
3 
All collaboration on quizzes and exams, unless explicitly permitted by the exam or quiz 
instructions, is strictly forbidden. 
 
Accommodations for Students with Disabilities: If you have a disability and have an 
accommodations letter from the Disability Resources office, we encourage you to discuss 
your accommodations and needs with the instructors as early in the semester as possible. 
We will work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate. If you 
suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from accommodations but are not 
yet registered with the Office of Disability Resources, we encourage you to contact them 
at access@andrew.cmu.edu.  
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: Supervised learning techniques (linear and logistic 
regression, support vector machines, naive Bayes, nearest neighbors, decision trees, neural 
networks), unsupervised learning techniques (clustering, expectation maximization, 
dimensionality reduction), fundamentals of learning theory (optimization, risk). Time 
permitting, advanced topics like transformers and reinforcement learning. 
 
Course Canvas:  
To access the course canvas from an Andrew Machine, go to the login page at 
https://canvas.cmu.edu/. You should check the course Canvas and Piazza pages daily for 
announcements and handouts.  
 
Grading Algorithm: 
 
40% 
Homework 
5% 
Gradescope quizzes 
15% 
Mini-exams 
15% 
Midterm exam 
25% 
Final exam 
 
There will be five homework assignments, of which your highest four scores will be given 
equal weight in calculating your homework grade, i.e., we will drop your lowest homework 
assignment score. Additionally, you will be given 5 “late days” that may be used at your 
discretion for self-granted 24-hour extensions to the assignment deadlines. At most two 
late days can be used per assignment, and late days are used in increments of one day—for 
example, turning in a homework 3 hours late will count as using 1 late day. 
 
No additional extensions will be given barring extraordinary personal circumstances (e.g., 
prolonged illness or a family emergency) that typically require coordinating makeup work 
across your classes with your academic advisor. Opportunities for extra credit points, e.g., 
through answering extra homework questions, may be offered at the instructors’ discretion 
at various points in the course. 
 
Gradescope quizzes will be short, multiple choice quizzes administered through 
Gradescope during the regular lectures, approximately one quiz per lecture. We will count 

 
 
4 
your best 10 Gradescope quizzes towards your grade. No extensions or makeup quizzes 
will be given. 
 
The three mini-exams will be equally weighted in calculating your quiz grade. Makeup 
opportunities for mini-exams, as well as the midterm and final exams, will be offered only 
in cases of extenuating circumstances that would cause the student to miss the main exam 
through no fault of their own (e.g., sickness, conflict with University events). 
 
The default method of assigning letter grades follows the standard grading scale (above 
90% A or A-; 80 – 89% B+, B, or B-; 70 – 79% C+, C, or C-; 60 – 69% D+, D, or D-; and 
below 60% F). We may lower these grading thresholds at the end of the course, particularly 
for students who consistently engage with the course (attend and ask questions in lectures, 
recitations, office hours, frequently help answer questions on Piazza, etc.). 
 
Tentative Lecture Calendar: This calendar is subject to change. Please refer to the course 
website (https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-661/) for an updated and detailed 
calendar. 
  
Date 
Day 
Lecture Topic 
January 
13 
Mon. 
Intro & MLE/MAP 
15 
Wed. 
Linear Algebra Review 
22 
Wed. 
Linear Regression, Part I 
27 
Mon. Linear Regression, Part II 
29 
Wed. Overfitting, Bias/variance Trade-off, Evaluation 
February 
3 
Mon. 
Naïve Bayes 
5 
Wed. 
Logistic Regression 
10 
Mon. Mini-exam 1 and multi-class classification 
12 
Wed. SVM, Part I 
17 
Mon. 
SVM, Part II 
19 
Wed. Nearest Neighbors 
24 
Mon. Decision Trees 
26 
Wed. In-class Midterm Exam 

 
 
5 
March 
3 
Mon. 
No classes; Spring Break 
5 
Wed. 
No classes; Spring Break 
10 
Mon. 
Boosting and Random Forests 
12 
Wed. 
Neural Networks, Part I 
17 
Mon. 
Neural Networks, Part II 
19 
Wed. 
Neural Networks, Part III 
24 
Mon. 
PyTorch 
26 
Wed. 
Mini-exam 2 and Neural Networks, Part III.5 
31 
Mon. 
Distributed Learning 
April 
2 
Wed. 
Clustering, Part I 
7 
Mon. 
Clustering, Part II 
9 
Wed. 
Dimensionality Reduction 
14 
Mon. 
Online Learning (Bandits) 
16 
Wed. 
Mini-exam 3 and guest lecture 
21 
Mon. 
Reinforcement Learning, Part I 
23 
Wed. 
Review Lecture and Reinforcement Learning, Part II 
TBD 
Final Exam 
 
 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education. ABET 
defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the courses you 
take. The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 18-461/661 and in what 
manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” through “7” in the 
standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by 18-461/661 have been omitted 
from the following list. 
 
(1) an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics: This course emphasizes 
machine learning methods to solve engineering problems of increasing complexity. 
Through problem solving in class (mostly in recitations) and in the homeworks, students 
learn how to use the concepts, principles, and techniques taught in lecture to analyze 

 
 
6 
datasets. We also discuss how engineering constraints affect the mathematics of machine 
learning algorithms.  
  
(2) an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified 
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, 
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors: In introducing different machine 
learning methods, the course highlights their limitations, including engineering and 
economic constraints as well as limits to their performance on different types of data. 
Students are urged to consider how these factors affect the success of learning-based 
solutions deployed to solve engineering problems. 
 
(6) an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions: Machine learning 
utilizes data to improve the performance of engineering systems. Students will be given 
tools to identify patterns, make decisions, and learn from data. They will practice applying 
these tools in homework exercises. 
 
(7) an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies: Programming exercises on the homework assignments require 
students to go beyond concepts taught in the lecture to design and implement specific data 
analysis techniques. The final homework assignment asks the students to explore specific 
datasets, acquiring new knowledge as needed to answer open-ended questions about the 
data. 
 
CMU