DSP
 DSP
 DSP
 DSP
 DSP
 DSP
 DSP
 DSP
 DSP
 DSP
 DSP
 DSP
 DSP
DSP
DSP
DSP
DSP
DSP
DSP
DSP
DSP
DSP
DSP
DSP
DSP
Digital Signal Processing (18-491/18-691)
pring Semester, 20
S  
25
COURSE SYLLABUS FOR SPRING 2025
Instructor: Professor Richard Stern, PH B26, (412) 916-7386 (cell phone), rms@ece.cmu.edu
Course Management Assistant: Course management responsibilities are handled by the ECE
Academic Services Center, HH 1113.
Teaching assistants:
• Vikram Bhagavatula, vbhagava@andrew.cmu.edu, (510) 491-8351
• Amit Thomas, amitthom@andrew.cmu.edu, (425) 561-2064
• Hao Wu, haowu4@andrew.cmu.edu, (724) 759-1966.
Overview of the course: This course addresses the mathematics, implementation, design and
application of the digital signal processing algorithms widely used in areas such as multimedia
telecommunications and speech and image processing.
Topics include discrete-time signals and
systems, discrete-time Fourier transforms and Z-transforms, discrete Fourier transforms and fast
Fourier transforms, digital ﬁlter design and implementation, and multi-rate signal processing. The
course will include introductory discussions of 2-dimensional signal processing, linear prediction,
adaptive ﬁltering, and selected application areas. Classroom lectures are supplemented with im-
plementation exercises using MATLAB .
This year we are oﬀering the course in two forms. The course in its traditional form continues to be
oﬀered under the number 18-491. In addition, we are oﬀering a second version of the course with
the number 18-691, which carries graduate credit. 18-491 and 18-691 will share the same lectures
and recitations. Students enrolled in 18-691 will be required to complete some additional work that
will be speciﬁed shortly.
Grading: Grades for 18-491 will be based in part on performance in three examinations (nominally
67% of the ﬁnal grade, with the ﬁnal exam having the weight of 1.5 times the ﬁrst two exams),
and on homework assignments (nominally 33%, with the lowest homework grade dropped from the
ﬁnal grade computation). The weighting of the assignments for 18-691 will be similar, with an
additional weight paid to the additional assignments for 18-691.
Prerequisites: 18-290

18-491/18-691 Syllabus
Page 2
Spring, 2025
Undergraduate course designation: area and coverage
Undergraduate course area: Signals & Systems
Class hours: Lectures are Mondays and Wednesdays, 2:00 to 3:50 (Pittsburgh time), in WeH
5403. Recitations will meet Fridays from 10:00 to 11:50 in WeH 5312 and from 12:00 to 1:50 in DH
1117. The major focus of the recitations will be to discuss practical problems, and especially to
review useful techniques for completing the following weeks homework. Unoﬃcially, students may
attend either recitation session, regardless of which one they are formally enrolled in.
Course textbook: We will again use the Third Edition of the text Discrete-Time Signal Pro-
cessing by A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Schafer, with M. T. Yoder and W. T. Padgett (Prentice-
Hall/Pearson, 2009, ISBN: 978-0131988422, to be referred to as OSYP) as the primary text for
the course. This book is the second revision of the original 1989 text by the same name, which
in turn is a greatly expanded version of the classic text Digital Signal Processing published in
1975 by the same primary authors. The ﬁrst two editions of Discrete-Time Signal Processing are
more verbose and tutorial than Digital Signal Processing, and they also include some new mate-
rial that represents developments in signal processing that have taken place since the earlier text
was published more than twenty years ago. The Third Edition is a more comprehensive rewrite
than before and also includes a companion website with demos. If you wish, you can use one of
the earlier editions of Discrete-Time Signal Processing (or one of the various International Stu-
dent Editions), but you will be responsible for mapping the sections of the text that are cited
in the problem sets into the corresponding sections in your edition. Students are STRONGLY
encouraged to obtain a hard copy of the book, either new or used, rather than work from a .pdf ﬁle.
Other texts: There is a huge number of good textbooks on the subject of digital signal processing
now on the market. Digital Signal Processing: Principles, Algorithms and Applications by J. G.
Proakis and D. G. Manolakis (Fourth edition, Prentice-Hall/Pearson, 2006) is a text that includes
a number of additional topics but that is written in a style that is similar to that of OSYP. There
are also several new texts that are integrating MATLAB into the presentation more than OSYP
does. One such example is the text Digital Signal Processing, A Computer-Based Approach by
S. K. Mitra (Third edition, McGraw-Hill, 2005), which has a bit more of an applied ﬂavor than
Oppenheim and Schafer.
Homework:
Problem sets will usually be released by Thursday evening of each week. They will
be discussed extensively (along with useful hints on how to solve the problems) on the Friday the
morning after, and are generally due to be turned in via Gradescope by Friday at 1:00 am of the
following week. The lowest homework grade will not be included in the ﬁnal grade computation, as
was noted above. In addition, to provide additional ﬂexibility in dealing with surges in competing
demands on your time, we will accept up to ﬁve additional late submission days over the course of
the semester, with a maximum of two such late days available per assignment.
MATLAB assignments:
A component of the homework will be computer assignments using the
MATLAB analysis package. You will be given accounts on the educational computers of the ECE
department if you need them. We have found that students beneﬁt highly from having individual
Copyright 2025, Richard M. Stern

18-491/18-691 Syllabus
Page 3
Spring, 2025
access to MATLAB . A site-licensed version of MATLAB can be downloaded from the CMU Andrew
software site.
Examinations: The ﬁrst two exams will be held during the normal class meeting times on Febru-
ary 26 (the Wednesday before spring break) and April 9 (the Wednesday after Spring Carnival).
The ﬁnal examination will be scheduled by the Registrar during the ﬁnal exam period. Please
arrange your other commitments so as not to conﬂict with the announced exam dates. Make-up
exams will not be given without extremely compelling reasons.
18-491/18-691 home page and course management platforms: We are maintaining a home
page for 18-491/18-691 which may be accessed through the URL
http://www.ece.cmu.edu/~ece491/
We will be putting all course handouts, reference documents, and other information on the 18-
491/18-691 home page. The pages will also include the MATLAB scripts used for classroom demos
and other material presented in the lectures.
We will also make limited use of the Canvas course management platform, primarily for processing
and distributing grades, discussing the course material (using Piazza), and turning in homework
(using Gradescope).
Oﬃce hours: TBA
Copyright 2025, Richard M. Stern

18-491/18-691 Syllabus
Page 4
Spring, 2025
TOPIC OUTLINE FOR 18-491/18-691
Characterization of DT signals and systems
• Signal representation and convolution
• Discrete-time Fourier transforms and Z-transforms
• Conversion between continuous and discrete time and change of sampling rate
The DFT and the FFT
• Discrete Fourier series, discrete Fourier transforms, and circular convolution
• Fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithms
Digital ﬁlter design and implementation
• FIR and IIR ﬁlter structures
• IIR designs from prototype analog ﬁlters
• FIR designs using windowing and frequency sampling
• Computer-aided optimal ﬁlter design
• Computer-aided optimal ﬁlter design
Signal processing in noise
• Introduction to stochastic processes
• Stochastic processes, spectral analysis and LSI systems
• Optimal ﬁltering in noise
Additional topics (not all will be covered)
• Linear prediction
• Lattice ﬁlters and their implementation
• Adaptive ﬁlters
• Applications to speech and image processing
Copyright 2025, Richard M. Stern

18-491/18-691 Syllabus
Page 5
Spring, 2025
TENTATIVE COURSE OUTLINE
Note: This information is provided only to give you a rough idea of how the course mate-
rial will be presented, and most likely presents an overly optimistic timetable. In addition,
the curriculum is changing somewhat during this year, which will impose some additional
variations. Hence, all speciﬁc details are subject to change. Sections are speciﬁed in terms
of sections of Oppenheim, Schafer, Yoder, and Padgett.
Date
Lecture topic (Section numbers in OYSP)
1/13
Intro to course, review of continuous-time signal and system concepts (1)
1/15
Review of discrete-time signals and systems; convolution (2.0 - 2.4)
1/22
Convolution examples; DT processing in the frequency domain: the DTFT (2.6 - 2.7)
1/27
Examples and properties of DTFTs (2.6 - 2.9)
1/29
Introduction to the Z-transform (ZT) (3.0 - 3.2)
2/3
ZT properties, LSI systems, diﬀerence equations, ZT inverses (3.0 - 3.5, notes)
2/5
Z-transform inverses (3.3, 3.5)
2/10
Relating pole/zero locations to frequency response of LSI systems (5.0 - 5.3, 5.5 - 5.7)
2/12
Sampling continuous-time signals (4.0 - 4.5)
2/17
Change of sampling rate: interpolation & decimation (4.6 - 4.7, notes)
2/19
The DTFS & the DTFT; DTFTs of periodic time functions (8.0-8.6)
2/24
Introduction to the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) (8.4 - 8.7)
2/26
QUIZ 1
3/1-9
SPRING BREAK (no classes)
3/10
Linear versus circular convolution (8.6 - 8.7)
3/12
Introduction to the FFT (9.0 - 9.2)
3/17
FFT alternate structures (9.2 - 9.5)
3/19
Discrete-time ﬁlter implementation; IIR ﬁlter structures (6.0 - 6.5)
3/24
FIR ﬁlter structures (6.4 - 6.5, notes)
3/26
Introduction to digital ﬁlter design (7.0 - 7.3)
3/31
IIR design examples (7.2 - 7.4)
4/2
FIR ﬁlter design using window functions (7.5 - 7.6)
4/3-5
SPRING CARNIVAL (no class)
4/7
Optimum equiripple ﬁlters: the Parks-McClellan algorithm (7.7 - 7.9)
4/9
QUIZ 2
4/14
Kaiser windows, frequency-sampling design, frequency transformations,
comparisons of ﬁlter types (7.6, 7.4, notes)
4/16
Introduction to short-time Fourier transforms (Lim & Oppenheim chapter, notes)
4/21
Introduction to two-dimensional signal processing (Lim & Oppenheim chapter)
4/23
Introduction to adaptive ﬁlters (Lim & Oppenheim chapter, notes)
4/28-5/6
Final exam period
Copyright 2025, Richard M. Stern

18-491/18-691 Syllabus
Page 6
Spring, 2025
Relationship of educational objectives of 18-491/18-691
to ABET student outcomes
1. An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics: students learn how to
extend the fundamental mathematics of linear systems analysis to the application of digital
ﬁlter design and implementation, high-speed convolution, multi-rate signal processing, linear
prediction, and assorted applications.
2.
An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet spec-
iﬁed needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as
global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors: design and implemen-
tation alternatives from practical speciﬁcations for digital signal processing are discussed in
terms of tradeoﬀs between computational cost, memory requirements, and system perfor-
mance.
4. An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts:
while not a major component of the course, DSP discusses the economic and societal impacts
of technologies that are developed.
6. An ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions: Most DSP
assignments, especially in the second half of the course include a signiﬁcant experimental
component using MATLAB .
7. An ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learn-
ing strategies: Throughout DSP, the historical basis of each relevant technology is presented,
along with a discussion of how the approaches were discovered, developed, and perfected.
Copyright 2025, Richard M. Stern

18-491/18-691 Syllabus
Page 7
Spring, 2025
A word or two about diversity and inclusion
The engineering profession has historically been one of the primary means by which people from
humble origins, as well as members of minority groups, have been able to advance their social
and economic status circumstances. Lamentably, in this country and around the world, people
over the years have suﬀered from discrimination on the basis of their race, religion, ethnic origin,
sexual preference, gender identity, and disability, along with a ton of other circumstances that I
am probably not thinking of as I write this. The multiple killings of people of color by various
police oﬃcers and others over the years has highlighted the extent to which endemic bias and
discrimination can and do have lethal consequences.
And this has been reﬂected by violence
directed toward individuals of Asian descent in more recent years as well as ongoing antipathy
toward some worshippers of Islam. Nevertheless, it is the implicit bias that shades many of our
day-to-day interactions that is more likely to aﬀect many of us on a more ongoing basis.
It is our challenge and responsibility as engineers to support everyone with whom we work and live,
regardless of race, ethnicity, or other circumstance, and to treat everyone the same, based on merit
alone. The murder of George Floyd in the Spring 2020, and other similar tragedies which continue
to this day, have sparked a useful conversation, although fundamental change remains quite diﬃcult
and elusive. It is also clear that the invasion of Ukraine by Russia and especially the current conﬂict
between Hamas and Israel have provoked new tensions between many of us. Let us all strive to
work toward constructive change both at the societal level and in our day-to-interactions with each
other and always be respectful of each other’s perspectives and point of view. While governmental
and institutional support for programs that support and promote diversity, equity, and inclusion
are currently being challenged by the incoming Presidential administration, and scaled back or even
curtailed by some academic and industrial organizations, the ethical principles that motivate these
programs remain valid and should be considered in your daily lives.
For several years the ECE Diversity, Inclusion, and Outreach Committee has worked to support
all of our communities and to identify issues that come up in our own classes and research programs.
https://www.ece.cmu.edu/student-resources/dio.html
Please contact us at any time with suggestions on how the DIO committee can better serve our
Department.
******
Academic stress and sources of help
This course, along with many others at CMU, can be extremely demanding. Because of these
pressures, the Provost’s oﬃce has issued the following statement, which I fully endorse:
Take care of yourself. Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well,
exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This
will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
Copyright 2025, Richard M. Stern

18-491/18-691 Syllabus
Page 8
Spring, 2025
All of us beneﬁt from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to
ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, diﬃcult life events, or feelings like anxi-
ety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Counseling and Psychological Services
(CaPS) is here to help: call 412-268-2922 and visit their website at http://www.cmu.edu/counseling.
Consider reaching out to a friend, faculty or family member you trust for help getting connected
to the support that can help.
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call someone immediately,
day or night:
• CaPS: 412-268-2922
• resolve Crisis Network: 888-796-8226
If the situation is life threatening, call the police:
• On campus: CMU Police: 412-268-2323
• Oﬀcampus: 911
If you have questions about this or about your coursework, please let me know.
******
Academic integrity
Although it is unfortunate in a university like Carnegie Mellon, I ﬁnd it necessary to call your
attention to the various university policies on academic integrity.
Please understand that we take any form of cheating or plagiarism very seriously. As a scientist or
engineer your reputation is of supreme importance. It is simply not worth sacriﬁcing the integrity
with which you are known for something as trivial and transitory as a homework or exam grade
on a course. And in the end, your throrough mastery of the course material, which you can only
attain by doing your own work, will be far more valuable to you than the grade you receive for this
course.
In this course it is considered acceptable (and even desirable) for students to discuss the general
approach to be taken for homework problems and lab projects with each other. Nevertheless, work
handed in for grading must be a product of your own individual eﬀort, so solutions which are nearly
exact copies of one another are evidence of an unacceptable collaboration. Looking up solutions to
problems on the Web is not permitted under any circumstances, nor is using any information from
exams and homework sets from previous years in this course. Finally, all work turned in on exams
must represent your eﬀorts alone.
The ECE