1 
 
 
 
 
 
[18-731 RW Network Security] 
Monday, 10:00-11:50 CAT, Location: [Kigali]  
Semester: [Fall], Year: [ 2024] 
Units: [12], Section(s): [#] 
 
Instructor information 
Name 
Assistant Teaching Professor, Jema David Ndibwile  
Contact Info 
jndibwil@andrew.cmu.edu  or  jeman@cmu.edu  
Office location 
D102 
Office hours 
12:30 - 17:30 CAT Tuesday and Thursday (By appointment only) 
 
TA Information [If applicable]  
TA name 
Oluwole Adewusi 
TA Contact Info  
oadewusi@andrew.cmu.edu   (WhatsApp) +234 803 757 0235 
Office location 
TBD 
Office hours 
Tuesdays and Thursdays 17:00 to 21:00 CAT 
Course Description 
o Some of today's most damaging attacks on computer systems involve exploitation of network 
infrastructure, either as the target of the attack or as a vehicle to advance attacks on end systems. 
This course provides an in-depth study of network attack techniques and methods to defend against 
them. Topics include firewall and virtual private networks, cryptography and public key encryption, 
network threats and attacks, Denial of Service (DoS) and Distributed DoS (DDoS), network intrusion 
detection systems (NIDS) and network intrusion prevention systems (NIPS), routing protocol security 
(BGPsec), SDN security, DNS security, wireless network security, security testing, Roles and 
responsibilities. Moreover, the course includes various lab works ranging from securing network 
devices to VPN configuration. 
 
• Students will demonstrate their Network Security skills through. 
o Individual Lab Exam 
o Lab exercises  
o Individual written assignments 
o Midterm Test 

2 
 
 
 
 
o The course delivery mode will be through. 
o Lectures 
o Practical demonstrations 
o Problem-based learning 
o Project-based approach 
o Student-lead learning 
• The course prerequisites are: 
✓ Experience with C programming 
✓ Basic Linux commands and operations 
✓ Knowledge of TCP/IP networking 
Learning Objectives  
The goal of this course is to provide learners with an advanced understanding of network security from 
both theoretical and practical perspectives. By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
• 
Explain common network attacks and identify the possible defense mechanisms for each attack. 
• 
Explain the concept of network intrusion systems (NIDS) and network intrusion 
prevention systems (NIPS). 
• 
Explain concepts related to Firewalls and VPN, common network protection mechanisms. 
• 
Configure both stateless and stateful ACL as well as DMZ firewalls on Cisco routers. 
• 
Explain the concept of applied cryptography including, symmetric cryptography and 
asymmetric cryptography, and cryptographic data integrity algorithms. 
• 
Outline the requirements and mechanisms for securing different layers of the network system. 
Identify the possible threats at each network layer and implement appropriate protection 
mechanism. 
• 
Configure IPsec, SSL, TLS on Cisco routers for real-time communication  
• 
Explain the requirements of network security management including testing, the policy as well as 
roles and responsibility. 
Learning Resources  
o Books 
o Wang, Jie, and Zachary Kissel. Introduction to Network Security: Theory and Practice, John 
Wiley & Sons, Incorporated, 2015.  
o   Perez A. Network security.  John Wiley & Sons; 2014 Nov 17  
o Software 
o Oracle VM Virtual Box 
o Linux distribution 
o GNS3 simulator 
o Packet Tracer simulator 
o Custom Cryptographic algorithms 

3 
 
 
Assessments 
The final course grade will be calculated using the following categories: 
 
Assessment 
Percentage of Final Grade 
1. Individual lab exams (x2)  
20% 
2. Group project assignment (x1)  
15% 
3. Individual written assignments (x3) 
30% 
4. Quizzes (in class) + 1 paper review  
20% 
5. Midterm Exam 
15% 
 
 
The assessment aim to measure the following: 
 
o An ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering:  
Through the cryptography and public-key encryption chapter, the student 
completing network security should be able to understand and apply 
mathematical expressions needed to address different encryption algorithms 
and how can be applied in the real systems. The engineering skills will be 
gained through innovative ideas that will be discussed in round tables that will 
be arranged for brainstorming in order to prove concepts 
 
o An ability to design and conduct experiments, as well as to analyze and interpret data:  
In the network intrusion detection systems (NIDS), network intrusion prevention 
systems (NIPS) and Distributed Deny of Service (DDoS) chapters, students will 
learn how to analyze traffic signatures and match them with known cyber-
attacks by using various tools for network sniffing such as Wireshark and kali 
Linux packages. Therefore, students will be able to experiment and analyze the 
current trend of network security trends in terms of traffic and be able to make 
accurate interpretations and help network managers to make data-driven 
decisions against securing their networks. 
 
o An ability to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs within realistic 
constraints such as economic, environmental, social, political, ethical, health and safety, 
manufacturability, and sustainability: For SDN security, DNS security, firewall and virtual 
private networks topics, student will use the latest tools and technologies.  Therefore, at 
the end of the course student will be able to come up with well-designed systems and 
sub- systems that are secure and can advise managers on how to protect such information 
infrastructure. 
 
o An ability to function on multi-disciplinary teams 
This course has the class works where the students will be able to team up in 

4 
 
 
groups that will discuss emerging technologies in networks and security and 
bring about innovation since two are better than one. Moreover, our students 
come from different disciplines and thus these class works shall introduce them 
to multi-disciplinary teamwork. 
 
o An ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems:  
Throughout the course, students will be requested to review various 
scientific articles, which will improve their critical thinking ability. Moreover, 
they will be shown and exposed to a number of questions deem their 
attention in order to test how fast they can address that problem and 
getting them on board in the world of quantum computing 
o An understanding of professional and ethical responsibility.  
For the chapter of Roles and responsibilities, the students will be taught how 
to behave professionally in such a way that none should be able to conduct 
for example penetration testing on any entity without undergoing prior 
authorization of the concerned organ. 
 
o An ability to communicate effectively:  
Through a series of presentations of the findings that will be presented 
against the min-projects that students will carry out, soft skills related to 
how epic presentation should be conducted will be taught and shown to 
them in order to apply them during their presentation. 
 
o The broad education necessary to understand the impact of engineering solutions in a 
global, economic, environmental, and societal context: Toward the end of the course, we 
will invite a guest speaker from network security-related company. The students will be 
able to relate the course content and what companies are expecting from them. Also, 
students will be triggered to know their role and impact on the societies towards the 
solutions they offer. 
 
o A recognition of the need for, and an ability to engage in life-long learning:  
Through the network threats and attacks chapter, students will be instilled 
with the spirit of knowing that addressing current problems and 
vulnerabilities it is never the end, since we experience zero-day attacks in 
security, time has come for students to be trained with the spirit of resilience 
where they have to continue learning even after class in order to foster and 
sustain their career and hence be updated according to the season and 
challenges. 
 
o A knowledge of contemporary issues:  
The students will be taught and be exposed to the current gap found in 
networks put up in several institutions where network infrastructures are 
there, but their related security is clause to zero. Therefore, there is a need 
to bridge that gap hence students through various proof of concepts that 
will be conducted will be the ones to expose that for the concerned 
organization to bridge them. 
 

5 
 
 
o An ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for 
engineering practice:  
The students will be equipped with outstanding skills while using emerging 
network security tools for vulnerability assessment and penetration testing 
as well as analysis to have all it takes to have skills that the world demands. 
 
 
Students will be assigned the following final letter grades, based on calculations coming from the 
course assessment section. 
 
A+ 
100% 
B+ 
87.00-
89.99% 
C+ 
75.00-79.99 % 
A 
95.00-99.99% 
B 
83.00-
86.99% 
C 
70.00-74.99% 
A- 
90.00-94.99% 
B- 
80.00-
82.99% 
C- 
69.99 and 
below 
 
Grading Policies 
● Late-work policy: Late work will be penalized with 25% deduction in the first 24 hours, 50% 
deduction after 24 hours and receives 0% marks after 48 hours. A doctor’s note that a student 
was not in a condition to do homework will be accepted.  
● Make-up work policy: A student will be allowed to do make-up assignments and/or assessments if 
he/she requests it in writing, at least 24-hours prior to the due date. What kind of documentation 
required will depend on the nature of the issue 
● Re-grade policy:  If students ask me to re-grade their work, I will do so if I receive a request in 
writing, in office hours, within 72 hours of receiving the graded assignment citing the reason for 
remarking. 
● Attendance and/or participation policy: There is no explicit means for attendance tracking; 
however, it is easier to notice any absenteeism. All students are argued to attend all classes and 
MUST communicate earlier the reason for not attending. 
Course Policies 
● Attendance & Participation There is no explicit means for attendance tracking; however, it is 
easier to notice any absenteeism. All students are argued to attend all classes and MUST 
communicate earlier the reason for not attending. 
●