CMU ECE 18-747: Data Center Computing
(Spring 2025)
READ THIS ENTIRE DOCUMENT
Course information
Instructor: Akshitha Sriraman
Office Location: CIC 4114
Email Address: akshitha@cmu.edu
Office Hours: Mondays, 1 - 2 pm ET
Teaching 
Assistant: 
Mihailo 
(Minya) 
Rancic
Email 
Address: 
msrancic@andrew.cmu.edu
Office Hours: Slack or email to schedule a Zoom/In-person appointment
Course Support: Academic Services Center
Office Location: HH 1113
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html

Course Description: Modern data center systems support a wide range of hyperscale
web services such as cloud computing, social networks, video streaming, online
messaging, web search, and online banking. This course will focus on studying the
systems software, hardware, and distributed systems technology that compose modern
data center computing systems. The course will also expose students to cross-cutting
data center problems related to service level objectives, latency unpredictability, total
cost of ownership, energy efficiency, scalability, sustainability, and equity.
The course is a combination of paper reading and reviewing, in-class presentations,
paper disucssions, and a semester-long project. Students will read up to two seminal
papers per topic and submit brief summaries via hotcrp. In the classroom, we will have a
student presentation of the papers accompanied by an interactive discussion on the
papers in terms of design innovation and challenges. From time to time, we will have
guest speakers who are typically the authors of the paper being discussed. Students will
work in groups of three on a semester-long, open-ended research project on a cutting-
edge data center topic.
This course is appropriate for graduate and advanced undergraduate students from ECE
and CS who are interested in a vertical study of modern cloud computing and advanced
data center systems. It is also appropriate for ECE and CS students who want to gain
some experience with a semester-long research project on a cutting-edge modern
computer systems topic. This course is especially suited for students who are more
interested in open-ended discussions, are interested in learning new concepts on-the-fly,
and have a curiosity to explore the unknown.
Students are expected to attend class meetings and actively participate in the
discussions. Paper summaries, presentations, and class participation are a significant part
of the grade.
Number of Units: 12
Pre-requisites: There is no formal prerequisite for this course. However, students tend to
do well in this course when they have a good understanding of systems and architecture
concepts and are comfortable with C/C++ and/or Python programming (e.g., students
who have taken 18-613: Foundations of Computer Systems or an introductory cloud
computing course).
Graduate Area: Computer Systems
Class lecture: MW 2 - 3:20 pm PH 225B. Class lectures will not be recorded since we
have moved to in-person teaching. However, if you are unable to attend class for some
reason, please let the professor know in advance; we are more than happy to
accommodate your needs.

Required Textbook: None
Suggested Reading: The Datacenter as a Computer
Other Supplemental Materials: Papers that will be shared through the course
Course Canvas: We will not use canvas for this course.
Course Website: You should check this website regularly for changes in schedule and
other announcements.
Discussion Platform: Students enrolled in the course should have received a Slack
invitation. If you are on the waiting list for this course, you will not receive a Slack
invitation. If you have recently enrolled in the course, you will be added to the Slack
channel 24 - 48 hours after enrollment. Please contact the instructors via email if you still
have not received a Slack invitation.
(30%) Course Project: Students will work in teams of three on a research project on
improving data center systems. Deliverables will include a proposal document,
deliverables document, milestone one document, milestone two document, final
presentation, and final project report. This assignment will provide students with the
experience of performing research in the field of modern data center computing.
(30%) Paper Reviews: We will be writing reviews for the papers that we read in this
course. These reviews will help practice critical examination of research papers
related to data center computing. Each student can skip a total of three reviews
across the semester (choose wisely!). Each miss beyond three will result in 25%
decrease in grade for this portion of the course. Reviews will be submitted through
hotCRP. We will discuss the guidelines for writing reviews during the first couple of
lectures.
(15%) Paper Presentations: Each student will be responsible for being a part of
approximately three to six paper presentations during the semester. Each student
will mostly be able to choose the papers that they present. We will discuss
guidelines for presentations during the first couple of lectures.
(25%) Participation: Much of the discovery and learning in this course will be driven
by in-class discussion. Participation will be assessed by engagement during in-class
discussions. Therefore, it is critical that students attend lectures and actively
participate.
Grading Algorithm
Paper review expectations

All paper reviews will be submitted via hotcrp (Create an account ASAP!)
We will read and review up to two research papers before each class. Each student
will be a part of approximately three to six such paper presentations during the
course of the semester.
To submit a review after logging in, click on the paper you wish to review and follow
the prompts to enter your review in terms of "strengths," "weaknesses," etc. Here is
the review template we will use.
The paper reviews allotted for each class are due on the day of the class by 9 am
ET.
Please submit your review exactly once. We will know if you've submitted your
review the second time.
Please read other students' reviews after you submitting your own review. Please
click on the "Good review" button for the reviews you like. Please refrain from
clicking on the "Needs work" button for other students' reviews (you will be
penalized for this).
For additional information, please check the FAQ section below.
Each student will be a part of about three to six paper presentations during the
semester.
For each presentation, one student will present a 5 minute summary, another
student will advocate for the paper's strengths (5 minutes), and the third student
will present critiques (5 minutes). Each student will present for no more than 5
minutes; please refrain from exceeding this time limit - you will be timed.
When presenting the paper summary: The summary of each paper should be brief
(i.e., 5 minutes). For example, an effective summary might include a slide for each of
the following: (1) research problem motivation, (2) limitations of the state-of-the-art,
(3) paper's main contribution, (4) high-level design description, (5) summary of one
main result. Please include your slides under the "summary" section for the
appropriate paper here.
When advocating for a paper: Create a few slides (5 minute presentation) to (1)
summarize the strengths that others in the class pointed out (please include the
student's name when talking about their review), (2) point out the strengths that
you particularly liked and show why these strengths are important, (3) identify how
these strengths can be extended beyond the context of the paper (e.g., can aspects
of the design be applied to a different problem?) - this third point is the most
important part of your presentation. Please include your slides under the "advocate"
section for the appropriate paper here.
Paper presentation expectations

When critiquing a paper: Create a few slides (5 minute presentation) to (1)
summarize the opportunities for improvement that others in the class pointed out
(please include the student's name when talking about their review), (2) point out
opportunities for improvement and show how/why these may (or may not) be deal
breakers, (3) detail how you might have executed the work differently to overcome
these weaknesses - this third point is the most important part of your presentation.
Please include your slides under the "critic" section for the appropriate paper here.
Please be respectful when critiquing a paper.
When advocating for or critiquing against a paper, please try to make substantial
points that are technical (e.g., should the experiments have included a different
baseline? Is the proposed system falling short in some way, such as causing an
increased power consumption?) - avoid basing your argument on non-technical
aspects such as the paper's readability, graph layouts, organization, etc.
All presentations will be accessible via a single google slides link.
Students will work in groups of three on a semester-long, open-ended research project
on a cutting-edge data center topic. Larger/smaller groups will not be approved. Please
note that it is critical to work on the project every single week to make significant
progress on an open-ended research problem by the end of the semester. If you are
stuck at any point in the project, please attend OH or schedule a separate conversation
with the instructor/TA to unblock yourself. If you happen to be working with a PhD
student on your project, please refrain from contacting the PhD student one week
before the deadline expecting an immediate response.
The goal of each project is to (1) explore an open-ended research problem, (2) conduct a
brief literature survey, (3) become comfortable with setting up and running data center
applications/infrastructure, (4) become comfortable with tooling and infrastructure, (5)
conduct meaningful experiments to show at least one new result that has not been
shown before (this could be a positive/negative result), (6) communicate your work via
speaking and writing. You may use Overleaf to create your project document. Please find
the project milestones below.
(Jan 22/ASAP) Find project partners: Create a group of three like-minded students
(e.g., does everyone in your group want to work on a software solution?) Please feel
free to use the "project-groups" Slack channel to find your project peeps.
(Jan 29, 11:59 pm ET) Submit project proposal: Email the instructors with your
group's project proposal document describing your potential project topic (1 - 2
paragraphs). The expectation for this document is quite minimal. You are expected
to describe the research project that you are potentially interested in pursuing
Project expectations

(nothing is set in stone yet). You can even list 2 ideas you're potentially interested in.
This doc is just to give me a broad sense of what you're thinking about. List your
group members in this document. During the first week, we will share a list of
potential project topics that you can choose from, via Slack. You are also welcome to
pick your own topic as long as you run it by us first.
(Feb 5, 11:59 pm ET) Finalize deliverables: Finalize project deliverables after regular
back-and-forth discussions with the instructors (you should have these
conversations during OH, via slack, or schedule a separate time). You should have
received approval from the instructors before submitting your deliverables
document (so plan accordingly). Email the instructors with your group's project
deliverables document, describing what you will tentatively achieve for milestone 1,
milestone 2, and the final report (<=1 page). Your document will answer the
following questions: (1) What is the specific goal of your project? (2) What will you
(tentatively) achieve in each of the milestones?
(Feb 25, 11:59 pm ET) First milestone: Submit your first milestone document that
defines and motivates the problem, surveys related work, forms an initial hypothesis
and idea, and includes some preliminary result to show that the idea is promising
(email instructors). This document should be less than 5 pages (not including
references).
(Apr 1, 11:59 pm ET) Second milestone: Submit your second milestone document
with a brief description of the idea, your design and implementation details, and a
portion of your evaluation (email instructors). This document should be less than 7
pages (not including references).
(Apr 14, 11:59 pm ET) Final presentation: Prepare a brief presentation (~10 minutes)
of your project work and present it with your group. Divide your presentation such
that each person presents for an equal amount of time. Each member must
participate in answering questions on the project.
(Apr 28, 11:59 pm ET) Final report: Submit a final paper on your work that is similar
to the papers that we read and discussed in class. This document should be less
than 10 pages (not including references).
The goal of this class is for all of us to learn and grow together via open-ended
discussions.
Please feel free to raise questions/comments at any point during the lecture .
During the class, we will have several discussions in small groups. Please actively
engage in these small group discussions.
Participation expectations

Please do not engage with the same small group all the time. Move to a different
group from time-to-time.
The ECE Numbers cluster: You will likely have to share these resources with other
folks. If your project involves fine-grained performance measurements on real
hardware, this might not be the best option since you might encounter interference
effects from co-runners.
The ECE Data Science cloud: You will likely have to share these resources with other
folks. If your project involves fine-grained performance measurements on real
hardware, this might not be the best option since you might encounter interference
effects from co-runners.
CloudLab: Please contact the instructor with your email addresses. The instructor will
create a project on CloudLab for you and add you to the project. You will get
dedicated access to machines using CloudLab and will therefore not encounter
interference effects.
Chameleon Cloud: Please contact the instructor with your email addresses. The
instructor will create a project on Chameleon Cloud for you and add you to the
project. You will get dedicated access to machines using Chameleon Cloud and will
therefore not encounter interference effects.
Pittsburgh Supercomputing center: If you need substantial computing, we can do an
education allocation at the Pittsburg Supercomputing Center. Here, we can get
access to the Bridges and Bridges-DL machine with 60,000 CPU cores and about
80+ A100 GPUs. Of course you wouldn't use the entire machine, but you have
flexibility.
Google Cloud Platform: Contact the instructor if you need access to GCP
educational credits. If your project involves fine-grained performance measurements
on real hardware, this might not be the best option since it might be harder to
measure hardware performance counters, you might face interference effects from
co-runners, might face overheads from virtualization, etc.
Please contact the instructor if none of the above computing options work for you.
We will work with you to meet your needs as best as we can.
Please submit a review for each paper on hotcrp by 9 am ET on the day of the class. Here
is the review template we will use.
Compute resource options for your project
Schedule

Date
Topic
Readings
Notes
Summary
Jan 13
(M)
Lecture
1
Introduction
to Data center
Computing
Introduction
- Find project
partners
- Form due
Jan 15
(W)
Lecture
2
Introduction
to Data center
Computing
Introduction
Akshitha
Sriraman
Jan 20
(M)
No Class
Jan 22
(W)
No Class
- Finalize project
partners
Jan 27
(M)
An Open-
Source
Benchmark
Suite for
Microservices
and Their
Hardware-
Software
Implications
for Cloud and
Edge Systems
Web application
paradigms
-
Supplemental
reading
Jan 29
(W)
Profiling a
Warehouse-
Scale
Computer
Microarchitecture
analysis
- Submit
project
proposal
document
describing
project topic
(<=1 page)
Feb 03
(M)
SoftSKU:
Optimizing
Server
Architectures
for
Microarchitecture
analysis
-
Supplemental
reading

Date
Topic
Readings
Notes
Summary
Microservice
Diversity
@Scale
Feb 05
(W)
A
Reconfigurable
Fabric for
Accelerating
Large-Scale
Datacenter
Services
Hardware acceleration
-
Supplemental
reading
- Submit
project
deliverable
document
(<=1 page
Feb 10
(M)
A hardware
accelerator for
protocol
buffers
Hardware acceleration
-
Supplemental
reading 1
Supplemental
reading 2
Feb 12
(W)
AsmDB:
Understanding
and Mitigating
Front-End
Stalls in
Warehouse-
Scale
Computers
Compiler/PGO
-
Supplemental
reading
Feb 17
(M)
-The Tail at
Scale
-Attack of the
Killer
Microseconds
Tail latency, Killer
microseconds
Supplemental
reading
Feb 19
(W)
Dynamo:
facebook's
data center-
wide power
management
system
Power/energy

Date
Topic
Readings
Notes
Summary
Feb 24
(M)
Resource
Central:
Understanding
and Predicting
Workloads for
Improved
Resource
Management
in Large Cloud
Platforms
Resource
management/scheduling
-
Supplemental
reading
- First
project
milestone
due on Feb
25 (<=5
pages)
Feb 26
(W)
Serverless in
the Wild:
Characterizing
and
Optimizing the
Serverless
Workload at a
Large Cloud
Provider
Serverless computing
-
Supplemental
reading
Mar 03
(M)
Spring break:
No Class
Mar 05
(M)
Spring break:
No Class
Mar 10
(M)
Cost-Efﬁcient
Overclocking
in Immersion-
Cooled
Datacenters
DC cooling
Mar 12
(W)
Chasing
Carbon: The
Elusive
Environmental
Footprint of
Computing
Sustainability

Date
Topic
Readings
Notes
Summary
Mar 17
(M)
ACT:
Designing
Sustainable
Computer
Systems With
An
Architectural
Carbon
Modeling Tool
Sustainability
- Guest: Udit
Gupta
-
Supplemental
reading
Mar 19
(W)
- Nines are not
enough
DC business model
Mar 24
(M)
No paper
review
Ethics
Mar 26
(W)
Software-
defined far
memory in
warehouse-
scale
computers
ML for datacenter
systems
-
Supplemental
reading
Mar 31
(M)
Cores that
don't count
Reliability
- Second
project
milestone
due on Apr 1
(<=7 pages)
Apr 02
(W)
No Class:
Work on
project
Apr 07
(M)
No Class:
Work on
project
Apr 09
(W)
No Class:
Work on
project

Date
Topic
Readings
Notes
Summary
Apr 14
(M)
Final project
presentations
Apr 16
(W)
No Class:
Work on
project
Apr 21
(M)
No Class:
Work on
project
Apr 28
(M)
Final project
report due
Q: Why doesn't this course have more traditional lectures?
A: This course follows the innovative flipped classroom teaching pedagody. As such,
students are expected to complete the readings prior to the class. Class time is
primarily used for presentations and interactions with the instructor and student
peers. Research has shown that such a teaching pedagogy is superior, enabling
students to develop a holistic understanding of the subject matter. Moreover, since
this is an advanced graduate research-focused course, its primary intention is
focused on enabling students to critically think about new ideas and explore the
unknown together.
Q: Why aren't there more lectures on background knowledge in data centers?
A: For a more traditional lecture-based course on data center or cloud computing,
please consider taking the “Advanced Cloud Computing” course. Our course deals
with state-of-the-art data center systems, with a specific goal of discussion-based
education that can facilitate critical thinking when building/designing large-scale
data center systems.
Q: May I submit a deliverable a day late?
A: The short answer is yes. The goal of this course is to help you learn about new
topics in data center computing in a relaxed environment that promotes learning. If
you are in a stressful situation and need an extra day to submit a review etc., please
let the instructor know about your situation; we are happy to accommodate your
needs.
Q: May I form a project group of two or four?
A: Unfortunately no. We will have project groups of three only.
FAQ: Setting expectations

Q: Will I get feedback on my paper reviews?
A: The professor will provide feedback in three phases: initial, mid-point, and final.
During each class, the professor will discuss paper reviews that stood out. Please
read other students' reviews, especially those that the professor mentions in class,
to better understand how to improve your own review.
Q: How do I start critiquing a paper?
A: Everything in engineering is about the "T" word --- the "Trade-off". A good way
to start is by analyzing the trade-off the paper makes. For example, to improve
performance, what did the paper compromise? Power? Security? How bad can this
be?
Q: How long should my paper review be?
A: We judge the review on its quality rather than the length. The expectation is to
make a couple of solid points each for strengths, weaknesses, comments, and
questions. Your answer to the open-ended final question in your review will
constitute the bulk of your paper review score.
Q: How do I understand and remember what I learned from each paper in terms
of technical concepts?
A: The goal of this course is not to make you remember concepts. After reading the
assigned papers, even if you forget a concept (e.g., a Remote Procedure Call) at a
later time, such concepts can easily be remembered by simply searching for them
on the internet. Rather, the goal of this course is to help you develop critical
thinking skills, which is not something that you can get by performing a Google
search. In this way, this course will set you up for a successful career in computer
systems.
Q: I feel anxious about speaking up in class. How can I still get a good
participation score?
A: Please speak to the instructor during office hours. We are happy to accommodate
your specific needs. If you are uncomfortable speaking up during class, please make
an effort to participate in the small group discussions. Even if you do not know
much about what your small group is discussing, please ask clarification questions
to stay involved in the discussion - such particiption efforts will count towards your
grade.
Q: I am finding it hard to answer the questions posed during the small group
discussions. How do I still participate in these discussions?
A: The small group discussion questions are intentionally a mix of easy as well as
hard questions (each class is different) to accommodate the needs of diverse
students. If you are finding a particular question difficult to think about, please rely
on and learn from others in your group. Additionally, you can also ask the instructor
to provide an example answer for the discussion question (when appropriate) to
help you get started.

Q: Would it be possible to not present a paper I was assigned?
A: Unfortunately not. All paper presentation assignments are final. If you have an
extenuating circumstance and have a classmate who is willing to swap a paper
presentation with you, we are happy to accommodate this.
Q: I'm not sure how to pick my project topic.
A: Please look at the list of potential projects that will be shared with you via Slack.
Then, attend office hours to discuss your interests with the instructor. We will work
together to find the project that is the right fit for you.
Q: My teammates are not contributing to the project as much as I am. What do I
do?
A: Please let the instructor know, so that we can assign grades accordingly. You are
also expected to mention the amount of work each teammate did in each
milestone/final report.
Q: I'm already working on a related research project as a part of my PhD. Could I
use this for my course project?
A: Please send the instructor a Slack message describing your PhD research and why
it is related. You should also clearly state the research goals that you will achieve for
this project - this work cannot already be completed. You cannot work on this
project alone; you will still need two other project teammates.
Q: This is my first time working on an open-ended research project and I am
struggling on some aspects such as infrastructure setup.
A: Infrastructure setup is a part of the learning experience in this project. Please
reach out to the instructor if you’re having trouble - please make sure you contact
the instructor well in advance and not simply before deadlines. As mentioned
before, you should be working on your project every single week, rather than simply
before milestone deadlines. Responses can be slow before deadlines.
Q: Lectures do not always tie in perfectly for the semester-long project.
A: While the course is different from the traditional structure of lectures followed by
homeworks on the concepts taught, all the meta concepts (e.g., tradeoffs) and
critical thinking from the lectures will apply in the project. Moreover, your project
will likely be related to at least one of the papers discussed in class. The goal of the
project is to give you a taste of open-ended research in a controlled environment,
for you to make a decision on whether you are inclined towards having a research-
focused career.
Q: I have some thoughts on how to improve the course. How can I suggest
feedback?
A: We value every student's thoughts/feedback tremendously and are happy to
change aspects of the course to make it work well for you. Please contact the
instructor during OH or via Slack and we can work to achieve what you need.

Q: I'm looking for a data center computing-related internship or full-time
position. Could you help me with my application?
A: Certainly! Please send your CV/resume to the instructor and they can forward it
along to relevant industry contacts.
Q: Will I know where I stand in terms of my grade after each paper review?
A: You will be notified about how your grade is progressing (and why) during mid-
point feedback and a couple of weeks before the final presentations.
Q: Could we have more software topics rather than hardware topics?
A: This course will balance both hardware and software system design. The first half
touches on hardware systems and the second half focuses on software systems. In
today's era of computing, a systems engineer can excel only when they clearly
understand hardware-software interactions.
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education. ABET
defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the courses you
take. The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by this course and in what
manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” through “7” in the
standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course have been omitted
from the following list:
an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics
an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global,
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors
an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences
an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts
an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan
tasks, and meet objectives
an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions
an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate
learning strategies.
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes)
ECE