1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-755: Networks in the Real World 
Fall 2024 
 
 
Instructor: 
 
Osman Yağan 
Email Address: 
oyagan@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  
Monday 2:30-3:30pm (Eastern time) 
 
Teaching Assistants: 
• Orkun Irsoy oirsoy@andrew.cmu.edu (Lead TA) (Pittsburgh) 
• Saadhikha Suresh  saadhiks@andrew.cmu.edu (Pittsburgh) 
• Kaitao Chen  kaitaoc@andrew.cmu.edu (SV)  
• Rui Wang ruiwang3@andrew.cmu.edu (Pittsbugh) 
Office Hours:  To be determined 
 
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html 
 
 
Course Description:  
18-755 is a graduate-level course that focuses on networks and their applications to 
various natural and technological systems. Specifically, this class delves into the new 
science behind networks and their concrete applications technological, biological, and 
social systems, as well as various design synergies that exist when looking at these 
systems from a cyber-physical perspective.  
 
By scope and contents, this is not just another class on networks. Want to know how 
complex networks dominate our world? How communities arise in social networks? How 
group behavior dominates Twitter? How patterns of interaction can be identified in 
hardware and software systems? Want to work on cutting edge projects involving 
systems and synthetic biology? Or social networks? Or networks-on-chip and internet-of-
things? Then this class is for you!  
 
Course requirements consist of a few homework assignments, a semester-long project, 
and in-class presentations of relevant papers. By structure and contents, this class targets 
primarily the computer engineering and computer science students, but it also provides a 

 
2 
 
valuable foundation for interdisciplinary research to students in related disciplines. Senior 
or graduate standing is required to take this course. 
Number of Units: 12 
Pre-requisites: Senior or Graduate Standing 
Graduate Course Area: Algorithms/Complexity/Programming Languages 
 
Class Lecture: 
• Pittsburgh: Monday & Wednesday. 12:30pm – 1:50pm (Eastern time), DH 1211 
• SV: Monday & Wednesday. 9:30am – 10:50am (Pacific time), B23 227 
 
Required* Textbooks: Below are two nice books on the topic, one of which is available 
online.   
1. M. Newman, Networks. (2nd Edition), Oxford University Press, 2018 
2. A.-L. Barabási, Network Science, Cambridge University Press, 2016. Available 
Online at http://networksciencebook.com 
 
* The lectures will contain material from various sources, and lecture notes will be made 
available (after each class). However, having at least one of these books will be useful. 
 
Suggested Reading:  
1. M. A. Porter, and J. P. Gleeson, Dynamical systems on networks, Frontiers in 
Applied Dynamical Systems: Reviews and Tutorials 4 (2016). Available online: 
https://www.math.ucla.edu/~mason/papers/frontiers-published-tutorial.pdf  
2.  D. J. Watts, Six degrees: The science of a connected age. 
3. M. Gladwell: The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference 
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: Network structure and dynamics. Processes over 
networks. Networks in the real world: Social and biological networks. 
 
Course Canvas: To access the course canvas from an Andrew Machine, go to the login 
page at: https://cmu.instructure.com/. You should check the course canvas daily for 
announcements and handouts.  
 
Piazza: Students are encouraged to ask as many questions as they have using Piazza. The 
instructor and TAs will actively monitor Piazza and respond in a timely manner.  
Piazza sign-up link: https://piazza.com/cmu/fall2024/18755/home  
 
Gradescope: Homework sets will be submitted through Gradescope at: 
https://www.gradescope.com/courses/ 
 
Grading Algorithm:  
The following method will be used to compute a score for each student in the course: 
 
40% 
Homework (4 sets) 
20% 
Final Exam  
40% 
Project 

 
3 
 
Late HW Policy: You may submit homework sets up to 12 hours late for a 10% 
deduction or up to 24 hours late for a 20% deduction. Any submissions made more than 
24 hours after the deadline will not be accepted. 
 
While lower cutoffs may be used, the following grade cutoffs are guaranteed:  
> 90 A  
> 80 B  
> 70 C  
> 60 D    
 
Tentative Course Calendar: This schedule may be revised during the term.  
 
At a high-level the content of the lectures is structured as follows: 
• Lectures 1-5: Fundamentals of Networks 
• Lectures 6-11: How to “Model” and Analyze Networks 
• Lectures 12-19: Applications/Spreading Processes over Networks 
 
Date 
Day 
Class Activity 
Deadline 
August 
 
26 
Mon. 
Lecture 1: Introduction to Networks; Class Logistics 
 
28 
Wed. 
Lecture 2: Mathematics of Networks; Graph Theory Basics 
M0 out 
September 
 
 
2 
Mon. 
Labor Day; NO CLASS 
 
4 
Wed. 
Lecture 3: Graphs ct’d: measures, metrics; vertex- and edge-
connectivity 
HW1 out 
9 
Mon. 
Lecture 4: Graph theory ct’d: clustering coefficient 
 
11 
Wed. 
No class (Instructor traveling) 
 
16 
Mon. 
Lecture 5: The structure of real-world networks: Power-Law Degree 
distribution; scale-free networks; assortative mixing.  
HW1 due 
18 
Wed. 
Lecture 6: Random Networks and Graphs: Erdos-Renyi Model 
HW 2 
out 
23 
Mon. 
Lecture 7: Random Graphs ct’d. 
M0 due 
25 
Wed. 
Lecture 8: Milgram Experiments; Small-world Networks; Watts & 
Strogatz Model. 
 
30 
Mon 
Lecture 9: Random Key Graphs for modeling secure sensor networks; 
Configuration Model; Barabasi-Albert Model with Preferential 
Attachment; Clustered random graphs. 
HW2 due 
October 
 
2 
Wed. 
 Lecture 10: Existence and Size of the Giant Component in Random 
Networks; Epidemic Spreading 
HW3 out  
7 
Mon. 
Project Presentations (Milestone 1)  
 
9 
Wed. 
Project Presentations (Milestone 1)  
 
14-18 
Mon-
Fri 
Fall Break; NO CLASS 
 
21 
Mon. 
Lecture 11: Community Detection Algorithms 
 
23 
Wed.  
Lecture 12: SI, SIR, SIS models. Epidemic Spreading over Networks  
 
28 
Mon. 
Lecture 13: SIR Spreading over Networks 
HW3 due 
30 
Wed. 
Lecture 14: Analyzing information propagation using SIR model; SIR 
model over multi-layer networks. 
HW4 out 
November 
 
4 
Mon. 
Lecture 15: Spread of Influence over Networks (Complex Contagions) 
 

 
4 
 
6 
Wed. 
Lecture 16: Recent results on modeling spreading processes 
• 
Talk by Yurun Tian on the impact of mask wearing in 
spreading processes 
• 
Additional talk; speaker TBD 
 
11 
Mon. 
Lecture 17: Network Robustness and Percolation 
 
13 
Wed. 
Lecture 18: Cascading Failures in Flow Networks; Cascading Failures 
in Interdependent Systems 
HW4 due 
18 
Mon. 
Lecture 19:  Recent Results on Network Robustness / Opinion 
Propagation  
• 
Lecture by Orkun Irsoy (Lead TA) 
 
20 
Wed. 
No Class (Office hour for exam preparations) 
 
25 
Mon. 
FINAL EXAM 
 
27 
Wed. 
Thanksgiving Break; No Classes  
 
December 
 
2 
Mon. 
Final Project Presentations 
 
4 
Wed. 
Final Project Presentations  
 
9-16 
Mon-
Sun 
Finals Week (Not relevant for 18-755) 
 
 
Project Discussion Meeting Schedule with the TA: Students will have a meeting with the TA 
on a regular basis to update their progress on the project and to receive feedback. These will be 
scheduled later in the semester. 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education.  ABET 
defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the courses you 
take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by this course and in what 
manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” through “7” in the standard 
ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course have been omitted from the 
following list: 
 
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics 
2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified 
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, 
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors 
3. an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences 
4.     
5. an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan 
tasks, and meet objectives 
6. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions 
7. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies. 
 
ECE