1
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-452/18-750: Wireless Networking and Applications 
 Spring 2025 
 
Instructor: 
Peter Steenkiste 
Office Location: 
GHC 9107 
Email Address: 
prs@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: 
TBA on web site 
Web Site: 
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~prs/wirelessS24 
 
Teaching Assistant: Smriti Jha 
Email Address: smritij@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: TBD 
 
Course Management Assistant: Tracy Farbacher  
Email Address: .tracyf@cs.cmu.edu  
Office Location: please use e-mail 
 
Course Description: 
 
This course introduces fundamental concepts of wireless networks. The design of 
wireless networks is influenced heavily by how signals travel through space, so the 
course starts with an introduction to the wireless physical layer, presented in a way that is 
accessible to a broad range of students. The focus of the course is on wireless MAC 
concepts including CSMA, TDMA/FDMA, and CDMA. It also covers a range of 
wireless networking standards, and reviews wireless network application areas (e.g., 
sensor networks, vehicular) and other applications of wireless technologies (e.g., GPS, 
RFID, sensing, etc.). Finally, we will touch on public policy issues, e.g., spectrum use. 
 
The course will specifically cover: 
 Wireless networking challenges 
 Wireless communication overview 
 Wireless MAC concepts 
 Overview of cellular standards and LTE 
 Overview of wireless MAC protocols WiFi, bluetooth and personal area 
networks, etc. 
 Wireless in today's Internet: TCP over wireless, mobility, security, etc. 
 Advanced topics, e.g., RFIDs, vehicular networks, sensor networks, DTNs, 
localization, sensing, etc. 
 

2
 
All information regarding the course will be posted on this web page so please check the 
page regularly. We will also make announcements in class. 
 
Number of Units: 
12 
Pre-requisites: 
18-213, 15-213, or 15-513 or equivalent background. C/C++ 
and/or Java programming skills are also needed for the project. 
Course Designation: Coverage 
Course Area: 
Computer Software 
 
Class Schedule:
 

Lecture:
Monday, Wednesday
2:30 pm – 4:20 pm
Wean 5302
 Recitation: Friday 
11:50am – 1:00pm 
Doherty 1112 
 
 
Required Textbook: 
A lot the course material can be found in an online book published by 
Springer: Introduction to Wireless Networking and Its Impact on Applications. Access is 
free for people at CMU (make sure you are authenticated!). Note that the lectures will 
often have additional material.  
 
The following textbook may also be useful: "Wireless Communication Networks and 
Systems", Cory Beard and William Stallings, Pearson, first edition, 2015. Again, it does 
not cover all the course material.  A more recent alternative is "Wireless 
Communications", Andreas Mulisch, Wiley, 3rd edition, 2022, which covers roughly the 
same topics. Both textbooks provide a lot more detail than we have time for in the 
course. 
 
Assignments: 
Four homeworks will be assigned throughout the course. Homeworks must be submitted 
using Gradescope by 5pm the day they are due. Homeworks cannot be submitted 
electronically through e-mail or blackboard. Late homeworks will be assessed a 30% 
penalty. No homeworks will be accepted more than one day late. 
 
The homework schedule will be announced on the web site. 
 
This course also includes a midterm and a final. The midterm will be on Monday, 
February 27th , during class time. It is closed book and covers the material in lecture 1-
13. The date and location for the final will be posted by the registrar. 
 
Project: 
The course includes two hands-on projects. The first one is an individual measurement project 
while the second project is a larger, open-ended project executed by small teams of students. 
 
The educational objectives of the course project include the ability to apply knowledge of 
mathematics, science, and engineering; to design and conduct experiments, as well as to 
analyze and interpret data; to design a system, component, or process to meet desired 

3
 
needs within real-world constraints; the ability to function on multi-disciplinary teams; 
and to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems. 
 
The due dates for the project miles stones will be announced on the course web site. 
 
Survey Presentations: 
A block of lectures in the course will be dedicated to more advanced topics. This part of 
the course will consist of presentations by both the instructor and by the students. Each 
student will prepare and present one survey. More details on the survey assignment, 
including list of topics, can be found in the Survey Handout. That page also includes a list 
of papers for each topic. The papers from a previous offering can be found on the 
schedule for the student talks can be found on the Survey Papers page. 
 
The dates for survey presentations will be announced on the web site once the student 
teams have selected their topics. 
 
The survey lectures are part of the course, and the material presented in the presentations 
will be covered in the homeworks and final. Specifically, the slides used in the survey 
presentation and one of the papers on the reading list, should be studied to prepare for the 
final. Both the slides and the selected paper can be found in the table with the course 
schedule. 
 
The education goals for the survey presentations include a recognition of the need for, 
and an ability to engage in life-long learning; and an ability to communicate effectively. 
 
Grading Algorithm: 
10% 
Homework 
5% and 25% 
Projects 
10% 
Survey Talk 
20% 
Midterm 
30% 
Final 

4
 
Tentative Course Calendar: 
 
Week of
Monday
Wednesday
Friday
1/13
Intro, course overview
Wireless challenges
Physical layer
1/20
MLK
Physical layer
Physical layer
1/27
Physical layer
Wireless MAC
Introduction Projects, Survey
2/3
WiFi basics
WiFi 
WiFi versions
2/10
Today’s WiFi
Cellular 1
Cellular 2
2/17
Cellular LTE
Cellular 5G
No class
2/24
Q&A midterm
Midterm
Spring break
3/3
Spring break
Spring break
Spring break
3/10
Wireless and IP
Wireless and TCP/apps
PAN
3/17
Sensor networking
RFID
Localization
3/24
DSA
3/31
Spring Carnival
4/7
Student Survey 
presentations
Student Survey 
Presentations 
 
4/14
Student Survey
presentations
4/21
Project presentations
Course review
 
The ECE department  Changes in the schedule will be posted on the course website and will be 
announced in class. 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes): 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education.  ABET 
defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the courses you 
take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 18-452/750 and in what 
manner they are fulfilled. Objectives not fulfilled by 18-452/750 have been omitted from the 
following list but are covered in other courses: 
 
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying 
principles of engineering, science, and mathematics: 
 
The students use mathematical concepts to model signal propagation and learn how to 
apply engineering principles to optimize network bandwidth and design wireless networks.  
 
2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified 
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, 
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors: 
 
The students learn how to optimize individual radio channels, wireless network 
connections, and wireless networks. Besides technical constraints, constraints imposed 
by spectrum policy and economic realities are an important consideration. 
 
3. an ability to communicate effectively: 
 

5
 
Students give several presentations. They must present a mid-semester update and a final 
report on their project 2. In addition, each student must present a “survey” of a specific 
wireless topic, effectively a 30 minute mini lecture on that topic based on ~3 research 
papers and background reading.  These presentations are in front of the class, i.e., ~20 
students. Students also must write a short (5-10 pages) final report for their project that 
states the goals and requirements of the system they built, describes its design and 
implementation, and presents and analyzes measurements of the system. 
 
4. an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, 
create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet 
objectives 
 
The second course project is performed in in teams of 2-3 students. Besides technical 
project goals, the students learn teamwork and team management skills. The course attracts 
student with very diverse backgrounds, including signal processing, computer engineering, 
and engineering and public policy, so some teams are inter-disciplinary in nature. 
 
5. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, 
and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions 
 
In the first project students measure the received signal strength in different scenarios (line-
of-sight versus non-line of sight, different distances, mobility versus stationary, etc.).  The 
students are asked to analyze the results and interpret the data within the context of the 
material taught in the course. 
 
6. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning 
strategies  
 
In Project 2, teams of students do a large course project on a topic of their choice.  About 
half the projects are on topics that are covered only lightly, or not at all, in the course.  
Examples include projects building a simple network using visible light or acoustic 
communication channels, cross-technology communication, or IoT communication in the 
white spaces, and sensing using WiFi .  This requires students learn about these new topics 
and apply their knowledge to their project. 
 
 
ECE