Carnegie Mellon University 
Course Syllabus 
 
18-765: Digital Systems Testing & Testable Design 
Fall 2023 
 
Instructor: 
 
 
 
Shawn Blanton 
Office Location: 
 
 
CIC 4121 
Email Address: 
 
 
rblanton@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  
 
 
Basically anytime (just email me) 
 
Teaching Assistant:  
 
Neway Li 
Location: 
 
 
 
C1 CIC, 4th Floor 
Email Address: 
 
 
weili3@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  
 
 
Thursday 1pm – 3pm 
 
Teaching Assistant:  
 
Chris Nigh 
Location: 
 
 
 
HH 1300 Coves 
Email Address: 
 
 
christon@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  
 
 
Tuesday 9:00am – 11:00am 
 
Course Management Assistant:  
Cassandra Pfannenstiel 
Office Location:  
 
 
1113 Hamerschlag Hall 
Email Address: 
 
 
cpfannen@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  
 
 
M-F, 8:30am – 5pm 
 
Course Academic Services:   
ece-asc@andrew.cmu.edu, 1113 Hamerschlag Hall. 
________________________________________________________________________ 
Class Schedule: Friday, 12:30pm – 1:50pm, Hamerschlag Hall (HH), Room 1107 
 
 
 
 
Pre-Requisites: 18-240, 15-211, (18-340 or 18-341) and senior/graduate standing. 
Students are also expected to be familiar with basic computer organization and be able 
to program efficiently. 
Co-Requisites: None.  
 
Undergraduate Course Designation:  Depth 
 
Undergraduate Course Area: Computer Hardware 
 
Graduate Area:  Computer Hardware Engineering 
 
Course Description:  
We will examine in depth the theory and practice of fault analysis, test generation, and 

design for testability for digital circuits. Topics to be covered include: defect types and 
their sources; fault models that include the single stuck-line (SSL), bridging, and delay 
fault models; fault simulation methods; automatic test pattern generation (ATPG) 
algorithms for combinational and sequential circuits, including the D-algorithm, PODEM, 
FAN, and genetic-based algorithms; testability measures; design-for-testability; scan 
design; test compaction methods; logic-level diagnosis; built-in self-testing (BIST); 
memory testing; microprocessor testing (i.e,. testing of the Pentium Pro); and IDDQ 
current testing. If time permits, we will also consider other topics such as mixed-
signal/analog test, micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) test, and nano-electronics 
test. As a motivating factor, we also consider the economics of testing.  
Course Assignments: Final letter grades will be based on the following: 
a.  Three in-class “quizzes” - 15%  (lowest quiz score will be dropped) 
b.  Homework assignments - 25% 
c.  Five mini projects - 50% 
d.  Lecture mini quizzes – 5%  
e.  Faculty course evaluaiton completion – 2% 
f.  Attendance – 3% 
 
Note: All homework assignments (unless otherwise noted) are to be handed in using 
Gradescope. 
The mini projects will cover the following topic areas: 
a.  Dominance and equivalence fault collapsing and fault ordering 
b.  Automatic test pattern generation via the D-algorithm 
c.  Concurrent fault simulation 
d.  Failure diagnosis 
e.  Design for testability 
 
Textbook:  Essentials of Electronic Testing for Digital, Memory and Mixed-Signal VLSI 
Circuits, by M. Bushnell and V. D. Agrawal, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2nd Printing, 
2001. Several “classic” testing papers and papers from the current literature may also be 
distributed during the semester. Additional material may be placed on reserve in the 
library as well. 
Tentative Course Calendar:  
Week 
Topics 
Date 
HW Assigned? 
HW Due? 
Project 
Assigned? 
Project Due? 
1 
Overview, VLSI 
Testing Process 
1-Sep 
HW1: Faults, 
Tests, and Theory 
Project 1: Fault 
Collapsing 
2 
Testing Logical 
Faults/Test 
Generation 
8-Sep 
HW2: ATPG 
HW1: 
Faults, 
Tests, and 
Theory 
3 
D-Algorithm PODEM 
15-Sep 
Project 1: 
Fault 

Collapsing 
4 
Fan/Decision 
Making/Critical Path 
Tracing 
22-Sep 
HW2: ATPG 
Project 2: ATPG 
Imply & Check 
5 
Fault 
Simulation/Random 
Test Generation 
29-Sep 
HW3: RTG, Fault 
Sim, Seq ATPG 
6 
Sequential 
Circuits/ATPG 
6-Oct 
Project 2: 
ATPG Imply 
& Check 
7 
Bridge/IP/Delay Fault 
Models 
13-Oct 
HW4: Fault 
Models and Test 
Tool Usage 
HW3: RTG, 
Fault Sim, 
Seq ATPG 
Project 3: SSL + 
Bridge Fault 
Simulator 
8 
FALL BREAK 
20-Oct 
9 
Fault 
Tuples/Diagnosis 
27-Oct 
Project 4: 
Diagnosis 
Project 3: 
SSL + Bridge 
Fault 
Simulator 
10 
IDDQ 
Testing/Memory 
Testing 
3-Nov 
HW4: Fault 
Models and 
Test Tool 
Usage 
11 
Regular Circuit Test 
and DFT 
10-Nov 
HW5: Current 
Testing and 
Regular Circuit 
Testing 
Project 5: DFT 
Project 4: 
Diagnosis 
12 
JTAG/BIST 
17-Nov 
13 
Test Economics 
Thanksgiving 
24-Nov 
HW6: DFT, BS, 
BIST, Test 
Economics 
HW5: 
Current 
Testing and 
Regular 
Circuit 
Testing 
14 
Real World Test 
Debug 
1-Dec 
15 
8-Dec 
HW6: DFT, 
BS, BIST, 
Test 
Economics 
Project 5: 
DFT 
 
Gradescope: In this course, we will be using Gradescope (a tool accessed through our 
Canvas course) to grade and provide feedback on assignments and exams. This will 
allow your graders to provide more timely and effective feedback. It also promotes 
fairer grading practices by facilitating anonymous grading and question-by-question 
(rather than student-by-student) grading. In addition, Gradescope makes it easy for you 

to access and review all your (graded) work. Our link to Gradescope is here. 
During the semester, students will use Gradescope to (a) submit work online, (b) view 
feedback and scores on graded work, and (c) make a re-grade request within prescribed 
guidelines. To access Gradescope, simply log on to our course’s Canvas site and click on 
the Gradescope assignment(s) link. 
This website (www.cmu.edu/teaching/gradescope/) provides students with more 
information on using Gradescope, including how to scan assignments via your mobile 
device, where to find copier/scanners around campus, and how to submit assignments 
online to Gradescope.  
Note: A key step in submitting your work to Gradescope is getting a high-quality scan 
(i.e., digitized version) of your work. Be sure to take the following important policies and 
procedures into account whenever you are submitting work to Gradescope:  
• If you are writing your assignment by hand (on paper), be sure to use a dark 
pencil or pen, and write clearly! 
• When you upload your work to Gradescope, be sure to (a) indicate where each 
question is located within your submission via the click-and-select Gradescope 
interface and (b) after you submit, review each page of your uploaded 
submission to make sure everything is clear and legible. 
• Give yourself some extra time to prepare and submit your assignment online to 
Gradescope, especially for the first few assignments when you are still getting 
familiar with it. (See “Assignment 0”: it is designed to give you a chance to 
practice a successful Gradescope submission workflow you can use throughout 
the semester.)  
• Keep a soft copy of each scanned assignment for your records. 
• Technical issues related to Gradescope, email: canvas-help@andrew.cmu.edu. 
• Important grading policy: If the grader cannot read your submission, there is no 
way to award points, so the default grade will be 0. 
 
Grace Days: Each student is issued 5 grace days. A grace day is a 24-hour period that provides 
grace on late homework assignments or projects. In other words, if you employ a grace day, 
there will be no late penalty applied. You can use the 5 days any way you like. For example, you 
can apply all 5 days to one assignment, or one day each to 5 different assignments. Grace days 
cannot be split however and thus must be used in whole-day increments. This means even if you 
an hour late, and you decide to use a grace day, then you must use an entire day. Finally, to use 
a grace day, you must inform us within 24 hours of turning in your late assignment. So using 
grace days later in the semester for already turned-in assignments is not allowed. 
 
Cheating: Don’t do it. Any and all students involved with copying homework, design projects, or 
exams will (in the least) receive no credit for that assignment. Harsher penalties are possible and 
left to the discretion of the instructor and may include course failure. All infractions are 
reported to the department, college and university, and dropping the course prior to or after an 

infraction is discovered is NOT allowed without the explicit permission from the instructor. Code 
comparison software will be used to compare designs for similarities. Bottom-line: Please do 
you own work and do not collaborate. 
 
• 
Extensions: Don’t ask. None will be given, especially in light of the grace days provided. 
Exceptions only for legitimate circumstances. For e.g., a job interview is not a legitimate 
reason for an extension. 
• 
Late Assignments: 10 points deduction per day (weekend days count). 
• 
Grading Appeals: If you believe there is a mistake in grading of any assignment, then 
bring it to our attention so that we correct. Grade appeal requests must be submitted in 
writing within one week of receiving back the graded assignment. Appeals may be made 
using Gradescope or Piazza (in a private post). 
• 
Re-scheduling: Don’t ask. No requests to take exams early or late will be granted to 
accommodate personal schedules, interviews, etc. 
 
Accommodations for Students with Disabilities: If you have a disability and are registered 
with the Oﬃce of Disability Resources, please come and talk to me to discuss your 
needs.  You will also need to use the online system to formally notify me of your 
accommodations. I will work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as 
appropriate. 
 
If you suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from accommodations 
but are not yet registered with the Oﬃce of Disability Resources, contact them at 
access@andrew.cmu.edu. 
 
Your Health and Well Being: Things at CMU can get stressful at times. Please remember to 
take good care of yourself! Now more than ever, with the additional sources of stress 
this semester, it is important for you to stay healthy, and to reach out to your support 
network and to other resources that can help you when things start feeling difficult. 
Know that you are not alone - all of us can feel overwhelmed at times (especially at a 
time like this), and all of us benefit from help and support during those times. Even 
though some of you are away from campus, there are still several resources that we 
encourage you to make use of if you are going through any sort of struggle. Sometimes, 
even if you don't think that you need it, or that it’s not serious enough to warrant 
reaching out, you may be surprised at how friends, family, course staff, and 
professionals can help you - consider reaching out to any of them you trust for help, or 
to get connected to resources that can provide the help you could use. An excellent 
resource at CMU is Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) - they are excellent 
listeners, and can help you through a wide variety of situations (including ones that 
many of you may not consider when you hear the terms counseling and psychology). 
CaPS is available for students on and off campus, and can help you with situations such 
as academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings such as anxiety or depression.  
 
Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS)  
https://www.cmu.edu/counseling/ 
(412) 268-2922 

 
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call 
someone immediately, day or night: 
 
CaPS: (412) 268-2922,  
Re:solve Crisis Network: (888) 796-8226 
 
If the situation is life threatening, call the police: 
On campus: CMU Police: (412) 268-2323 
Off campus: 911  
 
Finally, if you have any questions about this, or would like to talk, please do not 
hesitate to reach out to one of us. 
 
Diversity and Inclusion: The ways we are diverse are many and are critical to excellence and an 
inclusive community. They include but are not limited to: race, color, national origin, sex, 
disability, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, creed, ancestry, belief, veteran 
status, or genetic information. We at CMU, will work to promote diversity, equity and inclusion 
because it is just and necessary for innovation.  Therefore, while we are imperfect, we will work 
inside and outside of our classrooms, to increase our commitment to build and sustain a 
community that embraces these values. 
 
It is the responsibility of each of us to create a safer and more inclusive environment. Bias 
incidents, whether intentional or unintentional in their occurrence, contribute to creating an 
unwelcoming environment for individuals and groups at the university. If you experience or 
observe unfair or hostile treatment on the basis of identity, we encourage you to speak out for 
justice and support in the moment and and/or share your experience anonymously using the 
following resources: 
 
Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion: 
csdi@andrew.cmu.edu 
(412) 268-2150 
www.cmu.edu/student-diversity  
 
Report-It online anonymous reporting platform: 
www.reportit.net 
username: tartans 
password: plaid 
 
All reports will be acknowledged, documented and a determination will be made regarding a 
course of action.” All experiences shared will be used to transform the campus climate.  As 
someone who served as Associate Dean and Vice Provost of Diversity, Equity and Inclusion, feel 
welcome to speak with me as well. 
 
ECE