1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
11751/18781: Speech Recognition and Understanding 
Fall 2024 
 
 
Instructor: Shinji Watanabe 
 
 
Office Location: GHC-6405 
Email Address: swatanab@andrew.cmu.edu   
Office Hours: Tuesday 1-2pm 
 
 
Teaching Assistant: Yifan Peng 
Email Address: yifanpen@andrew.cmu.edu  
Office Hours: TBA 
 
Teaching Assistant: Jinchuan Tian 
Email Address: jinchuat@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: TBA 
 
Teaching Assistant: William Chen 
Email Address: wc4@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: TBA 
 
Teaching Assistant: Kwanghee Choi 
Email Address: kwanghec@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: TBA 
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html 
 
 
Course Description: The technology to allow humans to communicate by speech with 
machines or by which machines can understand when humans communicate with each 
other is rapidly maturing. This course provides an introduction to the theoretical tools as 
well as the experimental practice that has made the field what it is today. We will cover 
theoretical foundations, essential algorithms, major approaches, experimental strategies 
and current state-of-the-art systems and will introduce the participants to ongoing work in 
representation, algorithms and interface design. This course is suitable for graduate 
students with some background in computer science and electrical engineering, as well as 
for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: Sound mathematical background, knowledge 

 
2 
 
of basic statistics, machine learning, and good computing skills. No prior experience with 
speech recognition is necessary. This course is primarily for graduate students in LTI, 
CS, Robotics, ECE, Psychology, or Computational Linguistics. Others by prior 
permission of instructor. 
 
 
Number of Units: 12  
 
Pre-requisites: No course requirements, but it requires a sound mathematical 
background, knowledge of basic statistics and machine 
learning, and good computing skills based on Python and 
Linux.  
 
Graduate Area: Human Language Technology/Machine Learning/Speech 
Processing/Artificial intelligence 
 
 
Class Lecture: MM103 (In Person) 
 
 
Required Textbook: No required text. 
 
 
Suggested Reading: They will be shown in the lecture material. 
 
Reference Materials:  They will be shown in the lecture material. 
 
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: Introduction to automatic speech recognition, hidden 
Markov models, language models, end-to-end neural networks, application of deep 
learning to speech recognition, conversational AI 
 
Course Canvas: We will not use Canvas. Instead, we will use the following 
- 
Piazza: https://piazza.com/cmu/fall2024/1175118781 for the main discussions 
and course materials 
- 
Gradescope: https://www.gradescope.com/courses/783573 for grading 
 
Course Website: https://shinjiwlab.github.io/activities/2024/11751-2024f/ However, 
it will not be updated so often. Please check the Piazza resource page primarily. 
 
Homework Projects: we will have around 10 weekly assignments and 4 coding 
assignments. 
 
Reading Assignments: no reading assignments. 
 
Grading Algorithm:  
- 
Class participation 25% 
o Regular class points: 20 

 
3 
 
o ESPnet tutorial: 5 
- 
Assignments 30% 
o Weekly assignments: 10 x 1 
o Coding assignments: 5 x 4 
- 
Mid-term exam 20% 
- 
Term Project 25% 
 
Tentative Course Calendar: (TBA) 
 
  
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your 
education.  ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of 
all the courses you take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 
this course and in what manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” 
through “7” in the standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course 
have been omitted from the following list: 
 
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by 
applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics 
2. an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified 
needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, 
cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors 
3. an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences 
4. an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering 
situations and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of 
engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts 

 
4 
 
5. an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide 
leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan 
tasks, and meet objectives 
6. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and 
interpret data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions 
7. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate 
learning strategies. 
 
ECE