1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-861: 
Energy Project Development and Economic Studies 
Fall 2024
Instructor: Barry Rawn 
Office Location: D202 
Email: brawn@africa.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  
https://calendly.com/prof_barry_rawn
 
  
 
 
Teaching Assistants:  
Vincent Nishimiyimana and Mariam 
Sulleiman 
Email: vnshimi2@andrew.cmu.edu  and 
msulleim@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours:  By appointment 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Description: This course will introduce concepts and tools for the development 
and analysis of energy projects. Students will learn about energy project development 
processes through cases studies in the African context. They will also develop the ability 
to perform basic technical and economic feasibility assessments through directed 
projects. Relevant skills to be developed include financial modeling, energy yield 
estimation, social and environmental impact assessment and regulatory/policy analysis. 
 
 
Number of Units: 6 
 
Pre-requisites: None 
 
Class Schedule: Lectures: Tuesdays and Thursdays  
Section K1: Kigali 
14:00PM - 13:50PM   
E305 (F309 backup) 
Section A1: Pittsburgh 
8:00AM - 09:50AM   
REO (link mailed to students)   
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: 
 
Technical feasibility studies 
Financial feasibility studies 
Financial modeling 
 
Environmental impact assessment 
Regulatory and licensing processes 
Project financing 

                                                    
 
 
                                                                  
 
2 
                                                                                                                       
Canvas: To access the course blackboard from an Andrew Machine, go to the login page 
at: http://www.cmu.edu/canvas. You should check the course Canvas page daily for 
announcements and handouts.  
 
Piazza: Our Canvas site is integrated with Piazza, which is the best place to pose your 
questions about the course. Your classmates, instructor and TA can all add to a great 
answer. I will prioritize supplying guidance on Piazza because of its wide accessibility.  
 
Grading Algorithm: 
 
50% 
Homework 
40% 
Project 
10% 
Highest of HW/Project 
 
Late Work: 
 
All assignments have due dates indicated on the syllabus. In general, submitting 
assignments on time lets the instructional team provide feedback in a more timely and 
efficient manner. Assignments build on each other, so timely submissions are crucial to 
your progress in the class. If you cannot submit an assignment on time, the default will be 
that late assignments will be receive a late penalty of 10% per day. If you have to submit 
late, please contact me to let me know what’s going on (brawn@africa.cmu.edu). 
 
How to Succeed: 
 
Ask questions- in our sessions, or office hours.  Review materials when they become 
available on Canvas. Answer the questions of your classmates. Choose a project that 
matters to you. 
 
Tentative Course Calendar 
Date 
Day 
Class Activity 
August 
26 
Mon. 
Course Introduction, Project Development Process 
28 
Wed. 
Participant Introductions, Project Discussion 
September 
 
2 
Mon. 
Financial Modeling 
4 
Wed. 
Market/Needs Assessment 

 
 
3 
 
9 
Mon. 
Project Finance 
11 
Wed. 
Introduction: Technical and Financial Feasibility 
16 
Mon. 
Project Clusters: Defend Your Technical Feasibility 
18 
Wed. 
Project Clusters: Defend Your Financial Feasibility 
23 
Mon. 
Example, Market Assessment: Minigrid Assessment and SE4All Toolkit 
25 
Wed. 
Environmental & Social Impacts 
October 
5 
Wed. 
Examples: Turkana Wind Farm 
10 
Mon. 
Regulatory and Procurement Processes 
12 
Wed. 
Project presentations 
17 
Mon. 
Project presentations 
 
Recording of Class Sessions 
 
All synchronous classes will be recorded via Zoom so that students in this course (and 
only students in this course) can watch or re-watch past class sessions. Please note that 
breakout rooms will not be recorded. AV staff in the ECE department will make the 
recordings available on Canvas as soon as possible after each class session (usually 
within 3 hours of the class meeting, but not longer than 24 hours). Recordings will live in 
our Canvas website via the “Panopto Recordings” tab.. Please note that you are not 
allowed to share these recordings. This is to protect your FERPA rights and those of your 
fellow participants. 
 
Diversity and Class Conduct Statement 
 
Developing engineering systems require us to leverage all kinds of experience.  This 
course includes participants from a wide range of personal experience, training, 
geography, and culture. Our dialogues in live sessions may have to be time-limited, but 
as an instructor I require you to be respectful and open-minded, and encourage you to be 
constructive in your comments to others, not only synchronously in live sessions, but also 
online. 
  
 
 
Take care of yourself.  Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by 
eating well, exercising, avoiding abuse of drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and 
taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.  

 
 
4 
 
 
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are 
many helpful resources available on campus- but you must take the step of accessing 
them. In fact, an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. 
Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.  
 
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or 
feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. 
Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) is here to help: 
(http://www.cmu.edu/counseling/  and each campus has its own student services officers 
who you can meet in person and obtain information.  Consider reaching out to a friend, 
faculty or family member you trust for help getting connected to the support that can 
help.   
 
If you have questions about this or your coursework, please let me know. 
 
The following are some official policies that you should be aware of as a participant in 
this course. 
 
ECE