16/18-873: Spacecraft Design-Build-Fly Lab
Fall 2024 – Spring 2025
Course Description
Spacecraft design is a truly interdisciplinary subject that draws from every branch of engineering.
This capstone design class brings together the material from prior classes in a way that emphasizes
the interactions between disciplines and demonstrates how some of the more theoretical topics
are synthesized in the practical design of a spacecraft. The class will design, build, and test a
small satellite that addresses objectives and requirements posed at the beginning of the course
sequence. Students will work in subsystem teams, each focusing on some aspect of the spacecraft,
but exposed to many diﬀerent disciplines and challenges. Practical, hands-on engineering skills
will be emphasized, along with fabrication and testing of physical hardware and the creation of
thorough documentation.
Instructors
Prof. Zac Manchester
Email: zacm@cmu.edu
Prof. Brandon Lucia
Email: blucia@cmu.edu
TA: Neil Khera
Email: nkhera@andrew.cmu.edu
TA: Kyle McCleary
Email: kmcclear@andrew.cmu.edu
TA: Ibrahima Sow
Email: isow@andrew.cmu.edu
Learning Objectives
The goal of this course is to give students hands-on experience designing and building small space-
craft subsystems and integrating them into a CubeSat. Throughout this course, students will:
1. Understand how the design and integration of a system whose performance depends on the
success of many interacting subsystems.
2. Work within a small team to fabricate, and test hardware and software through rapid design
iteration.
3. Coordinate with other teams to integrate subsystems into a complete spacecraft.
4. Gain exposure to the complete life cycle of a small satellite mission.
Logistics
The course will involve designing and building hardware in small teams. Class time will be used
primarily for weekly team meetings and consulting time to meet with the instructors.
1

• Lectures on selected topics will be held at 3:30 on Mondays, followed by consulting hours.
• All-hands meetings will be held at 3:30 on Wednesdays, followed by consulting hours.
• Sub team meetings will be held once per week at times coordinated with the instructors.
• Attendance of weekly team meetings is mandatory.
• Slack will be used for coordination between teams and instructors. All students will be added
to the “SpacecraftDesignBuildFlyLab” slack channel.
• GitHub will be used to manage project ﬁles for all teams.
Assignments and Exams
There will be no exams in this course. Evaluation will be based on participation, contribution to
design and fabrication work, and ﬁnal documentation from each team.
Grading
Grading will be based on:
• 25% Participation and attendance of team meetings
• 25% Individual technical contributions quantiﬁed by git commit history and peer surveys
• 25% Completeness and quality of team documentation
• 25% Outcome of design review
Learning Resources
There is no textbook required for this course. Video recordings of lectures and lecture notes will
be posted online. Additional references for further reading will be provided with each lecture.
Course Policies
Attendance: This is a team-based course. In order to coordinate work among teams, participation
in weekly meetings is required. If you are unable to be present at a meeting, you must notify the
instructors and ensure that your teammates are prepared to present your work.
Accommodations for Students with Disabilities: If you have a disability and are registered
with the Oﬃce of Disability Resources, I encourage you to use their online system to notify me of
your accommodations and discuss your needs with me as early in the semester as possible. I will
work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate. If you suspect that
you may have a disability and would beneﬁt from accommodations but are not yet registered with
the Oﬃce of Disability Resources, I encourage you to contact them at access@andrew.cmu.edu.
Statement of Support for Students’ Health & Well-Being: Take care of yourself. Do your
best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
2

alcohol, getting enough sleep, and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals
and cope with stress.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, diﬃcult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Counseling and Psychological
Services (CaPS) is here to help: call 412-268-2922 and visit http://www.cmu.edu/counseling. Con-
sider reaching out to a friend, faculty, or family member you trust for help getting connected to
the support that can help.
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call someone immediately,
day or night:
CaPS: 412-268-2922
Re:solve Crisis Network: 888-796-8226
If the situation is life threatening, call the police:
On campus: CMU Police: 412-268-2323
Oﬀcampus: 911
3

Tentative Fall 2024 Schedule
Week
Dates
Topics
1
Aug 26
Course Overview & Logistics
Aug 28
Team Selections
2
Sep 2
No Class (Labor Day)
Sep 4
Mission Objectives and Requirements (Z+B)
3
Sep 9
Lab Intro (TAs)
Sep 11
All-Hands Meeting (Requirements Discussion)
4
Sep 16
Spacecraft Dynamics and Simulation (Z)
Sep 18
All-Hands Meeting
5
Sep 23
Orbit Determination & Spacecraft Navigation (Z)
Sep 25
All-Hands Meeting and Project Management (B)
6
Sep 30
Orbital Edge Computing (B)
Oct 2
All-Hands Meeting
7
Oct 7
No Class
Oct 9
All-Hands Meeting (TAs)
8
Oct 14
No Class (Fall Break)
Oct 16
No Class (Fall Break)
9
Oct 21
Attitude Determination and Control (Z)
Oct 23
All-Hands Meeting
10
Oct 28
Spacecraft Communication (Z)
Oct 30
All-Hands Meeting
11
Nov 4
Case Studies: V-R3x and PY4 (Z)
Nov 6
All-Hands Meeting
12
Nov 11
Case Study: Guest Lecture
Nov 13
All-Hands Meeting
13
Nov 18
Case Study: Guest Lecture
Nov 20
All-Hands Meeting
14
Nov 25
TBD
Nov 28
No Class (Thanksgiving Break)
14
Dec 2
Design Review
Dec 4
Design Review
4