Course syllabus: 18-879 (ECE)/42-699 (BME):  Special Topics in Systems and Controls: 
Data-driven AI for control of dynamical systems with application to neural data 
Spring 2025 
 
Class Hours: Tu and Thu: 3:30-5. No recitations routinely (might be there occasionally)  
Class Location: WEH 5421 
 
Number of Units: 12 
Pre-requisites: Introductory probability, linear algebra, familiarity with python, background in 
machine-learning 
 
Instructor: Prof. Pulkit Grover 
Co-instructors/TAs: Yuxin Guo, Jeehyun Kim 
Email ID: pgrover@andrew.cmu.edu, yuxinguo@andrew.cmu.edu, 
jeehyunk@andrew.cmu.edu  
Office Location: HH B202 
Office hours: 11-12 Fridays, starting second week, HH B202 and over zoom. 
TA office hours: 5-6 Tuesdays and Thursdays.  
 
Recitations: No routine recitations. One-off events will be announced in advance. 
 
The course is cross-listed in ECE and BME, and satisfies the computational requirements 
for the PNC program. 
 
The course is co-designed and taught by Prof. Pulkit Grover, Yuxin Guo, and Jeehyun Kim. 
 
Outline: The world is filled with nonlinear dynamical systems requiring control, from climate and 
robotics to human physiology. Understanding and controlling these systems can lead to 
groundbreaking solutions, including improved treatments for complex conditions. This course 
focuses on concepts and techniques for analyzing and controlling dynamical systems, 
particularly in biomedical and neural domains. With a foundation in basic probability and 
statistics, linear algebra, and machine-learning, the students will explore system dynamics, both 
linear and nonlinear, using brain and brain-body interactions as key examples. 
 
Learning objectives: Concepts of dynamical systems, linear and nonlinear dynamical systems, 
system identification and control. Exemplar dynamical systems in human bioscience, especially 
in brain dynamics and brain-body interactions. Examples of how treatment techniques interact 
with these systems and affect them, and how optimized intervention problems are formulated 
and solved. Application and refinement of techniques on simulated and real data.: 
●​ A key part of the course will be hands-on exercises in homeworks, where students will 
work with simulated and real neural and physiological data. These exercises will weigh 
heavily in the grade. 
○​ The students will apply techniques learned in the course to two neurostimulation 
testbeds:  
■​ 1. Simulated data of extracellular (invasive) electrical neurostimulation. 

       
                                              
 
■​ 2. Experimental data of transcranial/transcutaneous electrical stimulation 
○​ Pre-collected stimulation datasets will be shared on which students will iterate, 
resulting in new datasets (simulated and real) being created.  
○​ Real data will be collected by the teaching team using human experiments 
(stimulation of peripheral or central nervous system) based on student-suggested 
sampling.  
●​ Students will gain experience applying more traditional data-driven control techniques 
and comparing (or combining) them with data-driven AI. 
●​ The course will have 3 phases. Phase 1 is an introduction that lasts 4 weeks. Phase 2 is 
student seminars, where students will read, present, and critique scientific literature. 
Phase 3 has a discussion of advanced topics and course projects. 
●​ Phase 2 seminars: In each class in Phase 2, 2-3 students will team up to give a 20-30 
minute presentation of scientific literature they read before class. Each presentation will 
be followed by a discussion of connections with data-driven neurostimulation, strengths 
and weaknesses, and possible future directions. You must sign up for a presentation at 
least 2 weeks in advance. Each student will have to present at least once during the 
semester. Presentations will be graded based on technical understanding of the 
material, clarity, and organization. 
●​ Phase 3 final project: You will form groups of 2-3 and complete a project on 
implementation of a theoretical concept on the simulation platform. At the end of the 
semester you will submit a report in the form of a conference-style paper (maximum 5 
pages), and present it in class. 
●​ Integration of student interests: during bring-your-own-problem days, some students may 
discuss their own research problems  
 
Textbook: 
As this is a special topics, seminar- and research-based course, there is no textbook yet.  
For Phase 1, we will rely on: “Dynamical Systems in Neuroscience: The Geometry of Excitability 
and Bursting”, by E.M. Izhikevich, which is available online. 
For Phases 2 and 3, we will utilize papers and/or textbook chapters that will be shared as the 
semester progresses.  
 
Grading Scheme: 
45% 
Homework 
20% 
Presentations 
10% 
Class Participation  
25% 
Final Project 
 
Course structure: 
 
Phase 1: Weeks 1-3 
Week 1 (Jan 14/16): 

       
                                              
 
Lecture 1: 
●​ Intro to concepts in dynamical systems, nonlinear dynamical systems, neuroscience, 
neuron, neurostimulation, and applications 
●​ Two running course projects: 
○​ Simulations on invasive stimulation of different neuron types 
○​ Experiments: transcranial/transcutaneous electrical stimulation and EMG 
●​ Why now: Dynamical systems and neurostimulation – these are two fields that have 
existed for several decades, but their intersection isn’t well explored. 
○​ Motivating examples from neurostimulation on why nonlinear dynamics are 
important. 
○​ The difficulty in creating accurate biophysical models 
○​ Modern data-driven techniques can help address this gap 
Lecture 2: 
●​ Dynamical systems, simple examples, phase space diagrams and bifurcations 
●​ Curious phenomena in neurostimulation-related dynamical systems: anode break 
excitation, accommodation, resonance, temporal interference stimulation, pulse hums 
 
Week 2 (Jan 21/23): 
●​ Lecture 3: The Hodgkin Huxley model of neural dynamics  
●​ Lecture 4:  
○​ Hodgkin-Huxley continued: explaining anode-break excitation, accommodation, 
and TI stimulation  
○​ Cable equation, Rattay’s activating function for neurostimulation using 
extracellular electric fields 
●​ HW: Extracellular stimulation simulation 
 
Week 3 (Jan 28/30): 
●​ Detailed description of how neurostimulation of the primary motor cortex generates EMG 
○​ EMG measurement and classification.  
●​ In person demo on EMG generation through neurostimulation. 
●​ HW: EMG classification 
 
Phase 2: Weeks 4-10: Student presentations 
 
Week 4 (Feb 4/6): Multi-arm bandits 1 (2 student presentations) 
●​ Multi-arm bandits (1. Epsilon-greedy and UCB; 2. Thompson sampling) 
●​ HW: run on neurostimulation simulator for energy-efficient stimulation 
 
Week 5 (Feb 11/13): Advanced multi-arm bandits 2 (2 student presentations) 
●​ No new homework 
 
Week 6 (Feb 18/20): Bayes Optimization 1 (2 student presentations):  
●​ HW: energy-efficient stimulation and selective stimulation 

       
                                              
 
 
Week 7 (Feb 25/27): Bayes Op 2 and PATHFINDER (2 student presentations or one guest 
lecture): 
●​ No new homework 
 
SPRING BREAK 
 
Week 8 (Mar 11/13): EMG application: 
●​ Simple optimization techniques (epsilon-greedy) run on real neurostimulation 
●​ Homework:  
○​ Energy-efficient stimulation 
○​ Selective stimulation 
 
Week 9 (Mar 18/20): Multi-Objective Optimization (2 student presentations): 
 
Week 10 (Mar 25/27) Reinforcement learning (2 student presentations): 
 
Phase 3: Advanced topics and course project 
 
Week 11 (April 1/3): Model predictive control (guest lecture by Dr. Raffaele Romagnoli), 
adopt-your-own-approach (course project) office hour 
 
Week 12 (April 8/10): Dynamic mode decomposition, course project office hour 
 
Week 13 (April 15/17): Koopman operator, course project office hour. 
​
Week 14 (April 22/24): Course project presentations. 
—