1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-883 L4: Integrated Energy Systems   
Spring 2025 
 
 
Instructor: 
 
Jesse Thornburg 
 
Office Location:   
D204 
Email Address:    
jthornbu@andrew.cmu.edu  
Office Hours:  
Thursdays 3-4pm SAST 
 
Teaching Assistant: Mariam Sulleiman 
Email Address: 
msulleim@andrew.cmu.edu
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html 
 
 
Course Description:  
Our energy systems – from electricity to thermal to transportation fuels – are at the core 
of our economies, powering commerce and industry. They are critical to achieving 
development goals like food security and access to quality healthcare. Energy systems are 
multidimensional and complex, so understanding today’s various energy sources and 
their interactions is key to designing sustainable, low-carbon futures. This 
interdisciplinary course sets the foundation for future energy professionals by exploring a 
range of renewable and traditional energy sources, how they are integrated into and shape 
our society, and what this means for technology design, decision-making, and distribution 
to energy consumers. 
 
Number of Units:  
6 
 
Pre-requisites:  
None 
 
Graduate Area:  
Energy 
 
Class Lecture: 
Tuesdays/Thursdays 18:00-19:50 SAST (in person) 
Textbook:  
 
Renewable Energy: Power for a Sustainable Future, 4th Edition 
Stephen Peake (editor) 
 
Suggested Readings: Articles and book chapters posted on Course Canvas 
 

 
2 
 
 
Brief List of Topics Covered: Electrical power generation, thermal energy capture, 
renewable energy integration, storage (batteries, thermal, and pumped hydro), overviews 
of distribution and transmission 
 
Course Canvas : https://canvas.cmu.edu/courses/46693 
Canvas login page: https://cmu.instructure.com/. You should check the course Canvas 
daily for announcements and handouts.  
 
Grading Cutoffs:  
Grading will be based on a mixture of written homework assignments and a final project 
that includes a presentation. Course grading is based on the following performance 
standard: 
A: Impressive work that is above and beyond; mastery of all 
concepts; nearly error-free work 
 
B: Complete and respectable work; mastery of most concepts; 
limited errors 
 
C: Perfunctory; superficial; substantial gaps in knowledge; 
frequent errors 
 
The numerical cutoffs for each letter grades are as follows: 
 
 
 
    A: 92.5 to 100 
    A-: 90 to 92.5 
    B+: 87.5 to 90 
    B: 82.5 to 87.5 
    B-: 80 to 82.5 
  
 
 
    C+: 77.5 to 80 
    C: 72.5 to 77.5 
    C-: 70 to 72.5 
    D+: 67.5 to 70 
    D: 62.5 to 67.5 
    D-: 60 to 62.5 
    F: Less than 60 
Late Grade Policy 
Based on recommendations from CMU's Eberly Center, assignments may be submitted 
late but will earn a late penalty depending on how long after the deadline the submission 
is made on Canvas (or by email if absolutely necessary - see above).  An assignment 
submitted within the 24 hours after the deadline will only be eligible for 80% of the 
maximum number of point allotted. A submission in the following 24 hours (up to 48 
hours after the deadline) will only be eligible for 60%  of the maximum number of point 
allotted, and so on for each additional 24 hour period after the deadline until the grade 
drops to zero from the late penalty alone. The above-described late penalty does not 
apply to projects or in-class presentations (e.g., the final group project presentation), 
where failure to show up on time to present and/or failure to participate with your group 
in person on such a presentation by default yields an automatic 0 for that student's grade 

 
3 
 
on that presentation. This final case is more serious because certain group member(s) are 
letting down the rest of the group in a highly-weighted and potentially high-pressure 
scenario. If you experience extenuating circumstances (e.g., you are hospitalized) 
prohibiting you individually from completing your responsibilities in such a case, please 
let me know and bring documentation (e.g., hospitalization papers and a doctor's note). I 
will evaluate these instances on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Tentative Course Calendar:  
Date 
Day 
Class Topic 
4 
Tues 
Introduction and Motivation (Renewables and Energy Needs) 
6 
Thurs 
Solar Thermal  
11 
Tues 
Solar Photovoltaics (PV) 
13 
Thurs 
Geothermal 
18 
Tues 
Wave and Tidal Energy 
20 
Thurs 
Wind Energy 
25 
Tues 
Midterm Presentations (no lecture) 
27 
Thurs 
Hydropower 
April 
1 
Tues 
Overview of Storage (batteries and pumped hydro) 
3 
Thurs 
Overview of Distribution 
7-11 
Mon-Fri 
Rwanda Memorial Week – No Classes 
15 
Tues 
Overview of Transmission 
    17 
Thurs 
Vehicle-to-Grid and EV integration 
22 
Tues 
Electricity Trading 
24 
Thurs 
Final Project Presentations (no lecture) 
 
Education Objectives (Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes) 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your 
education.  ABET defines 7 Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of 
all the courses you take.  The following list describes which objectives are fulfilled by 
this course and in what manner they are fulfilled. The objectives are numbered from “1” 
through “7” in the standard ABET parlance. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course 
have been omitted from the following list: 
 
1. Ability to identify data, methods, and tools for evaluating the impact of an energy 
installation 
2. Ability to investigate the energy mix in different countries and the reasons behind 
this 
3. Ability to plan a field visit to a power generation plant (e.g., solar or hydro) and 
collect data on its outputs 
4. Ability to recognize the critical social and cultural dimensions of Africa’s energy 
transition 
5. Ability to identify data, methods, and tools for evaluating project impact 
6. Ability to investigate the energy mix in different countries and the reasons behind 
this 
7. An ability to collect data on the outputs of an electric power generation plant 
8. An ability to recognize the critical social and cultural dimensions of Africa’s 
energy transition 

 
4 
 
9. An ability to acquire and apply new knowledge around electric power generation, 
transmission, and distribution, especially concerning new power technologies. 
 
ECE