1 
                                                                                                                       
 
 
Course Syllabus 
18-989: Introduction to Graduate Studies   
Fall 2024 
 
 
Instructors: Holly Skovira (hskovira@andrew.cmu.edu) & Jeannette Daly 
(jrdaly@cmu.edu)  
Office Location: HH 1116 & 1113D  
Office Hours: By appointment 
 
 
Teaching Assistants: Bangjie Xue (bangjiex@andrew.cmu.edu) and Aditya Khandelwal 
apkhande@andrew.cmu.edu  
 
Course Support: Academic Services Center 
Office Location: HH 1113 
Website: https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html  
 
 
Course Description:  
 
 
The Introduction to Graduate Studies course is designed to be an initial cohort experience 
for first-semester graduate students through which students will learn how to be engaged 
citizens of the ECE department, the CMU campus community, and the broader 
engineering profession. This course will introduce and discuss career paths within ECE 
and the nature of work in existing companies, startup ventures and academia. The course 
will also increase awareness and understanding of departmental and campus resources, 
academic integrity issues, Carnegie Mellon community standards, and the ethical job 
search. It will engage students with what it means to build and be a part of a diverse, 
equitable, and inclusive culture. Topics covered include: career path options, university 
academic integrity policies, ethical job search practices, how to navigate the 
job/internship search process, cultural humility, an introduction to social identities and 
being an ally, and best practices for pursuing a career in research, industry, or start-up 
companies. This is an in-person course required in the first semester for all incoming 
graduate students. Attendance and participation in class are required and will determine a 
pass/fail grade. 
 
Number of Units:  
1 
 
Pre-requisites: None  
 

 
2 
 
Class Lecture: The class meets every Tuesday (section A) or Thursday (section B) from 
9:00am-9:50am in BH A51.  
 
Required Textbook: There is no required textbook for the course. Any readings or 
videos will be provided on the Canvas course site at no cost. 
 
Course Canvas:  
To access the course canvas, go to the login page at: https://cmu.instructure.com/. You 
should check the course Canvas daily for announcements and handouts.  
 
Course Assignments 
Majority of assignments (except