ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
ADSP
Advanced Digital Signal Processing (18-792)
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Fall Semester 2024
PRELIMINARY SYLLABUS FOR FALL 2024
Instructor: Professor Richard Stern, PH B26, (412) 916-7386, rms@cs.cmu.edu
Teaching assistants:
• Abdulhamid Aldoobi, aaldoobi@andrew.cmu.edu
• Tony Su, tungches@andrew.cmu.edu
General course support: Course support for things like handouts, homework and exam solutions,
etc., will be handled at the ECE Academic Service Center, HH 1113. The website for the ASC is
https://www.ece.cmu.edu/academics/academic-services-center.html.
Overview of the course: This course is a second course in one-dimensional digital signal pro-
cessing that will introduce a number of topics of current importance in research and industry. The
course will include a uniﬁed treatment of modern spectral estimation techniques, linear prediction,
and adaptive ﬁltering, along with discussions about related topics including multi-rate DSP, short-
time Fourier analysis, wavelet processing and adaptive array processing. Many of these topics will
be based on diﬀerent types of optimum signal processing methods using least-squares estimation
concepts and Wiener ﬁltering.
Most of the topics discussed in 18-792 concern techniques of statistical signal processing, so students
are expected to have already completed a basic undergraduate course in applied probability as well
as a ﬁrst course in digital signal processing. Background material in stochastic processes will be
reviewed before the material is covered in depth.
To the extent possible, homework assignments in 18-792 will be dominated by a series of project
assignments in which students implement and analyze the various signal processing algorithms
discussed in class in MATLAB . Homework will be turned in online using Gradescope, and executable
MATLAB code will be turned in online as well.

18-792 Syllabus
Page 2
Fall, 2024
Major Educational Objectives (with relation to Course Outcomes):
• (a) an ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering: ADSP concerns
the application of contemporary techniques in signal processing and statistical analysis to
solve practical problems in engineering.
• (c) an ability to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs within realis-
tic constraints such as economic, environmental, social, political, ethical, health and safety,
manufacturability, and sustainability: the ADSP homework assignments include major design
components, with attention paid to issues such as processing time, storage, and computational
complexity.
• (j) a knowledge of contemporary issues: the techniques used in ADSP are among the current
state-of-the-art as practiced by leading professionals in the industry.
• (k) an ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for engi-
neering practice: ADSP makes extensive use of the latest engineering algorithms, as well as
the most popular engineering design tool for signal processing, MATLAB .
Prerequisites: 18-491/691 and 36-217, or consent of the instructor.
MATLAB
(or possibly
Python) programming experience is necessary to complete the project assignments.
While un-
dergraduates who have completed 18-491/691 and 36-217 are encouraged to consider taking this
course, we note that it will be taught as a graduate-level course rather than as a senior-level course.
Students will be expected to work at a higher level of intensity than in undergraduate courses.
Class times and rooms: Lectures are Mondays and Wednesdays, 2:00 to 3:50 in WeH 4625.
Recitations are Fridays 10:00 to 11:50 in PH 125B. The major focus of the recitations will be to
discuss practical problems, and especially to review useful techniques for completing the following
week’s homework assignment. Occasionally the recitation and lecture days may be interchanged.
Attendance expectations: This semester we will be expecting that you attend classes in person.
The lectures will be recorded on Zoom, for oﬄine access after the lectures. The zoom recordings are
not intended to be a replacement for in-class attendance. The notes from each lecture will be made
available promptly on the course website. If COVID returns, we will make special arrangements
to get lecture material and course notes to students who must isolate after testing positive for the
virus, as needed. Please contact the Instructor (i.e. me) if special problems arise.
Attendance for all classes, including recitations, is highly recommended! It will make a big diﬀerence
in your absorption and mastery of the course material.
Primary reading material: The selection of a textbook for an advanced topics course like 18-792
is more diﬃcult than it is for a basic DSP course such as 18-491, as the choice of topics and style
of presentation of the material vary far more from instructor to instructor. We will be using the
following sources as your primary texts:
• Selected chapters from the edited book Advanced Topics in Signal Processing, edited by Jae
S. Lim and Alan V. Oppenheim (Prentice-Hall, 1987). This resource will be used for our
Copyright 2024, Richard M. Stern

18-792 Syllabus
Page 3
Fall, 2024
discussions on multi-rate DSP, short-time Fourier analysis, and adaptive ﬁltering. Although
Lim (LO) has been out of print for years (with no hope for revival), it will be duplicated
(with the permission of the publisher) and distributed to students in this class at no cost.
• The text Discrete-Time Signal Processing, Third Edition, by A. V. Oppenheim and R. V.
Schafer (Prentice-Hall 2010)). This book is familiar to many of you as it has been the text for
18-491 in recent years. OSYP will be used as the text for classical sampling and elemnemtary
stochastic processes.
• The book Theory and Application of Speech Processing, Rabiner, L. R. and Schafer, R. W.
(2010), Pearson Press, will be the primary source for linear prediction.
• In addition to the sources cited above, we are also providing a complete set of lecture notes
that were originally compiled and edited over the summer of 2020.
These notes, which
presently have the prosaic title Selected Topics in Advanced Digital Signal Processing, are
available online in .pdf form at
http://www.ece.cmu.edu/~ece792/handouts/Notes ADSP.pdf
Currently the last chapter on adaptive arrays is incomplete, but it is being actively rewritten
and will be in better shape by the time we get to the end of the semester. If the notes ever
stabilize (no promises here!), they will also be available optionally in hardcopy book form
for the cost of publication and shipping. These notes are no more than a condensed prose
transcription of what I present in class. They do not provide anything close to the context
that is available from reading the original sources, which are identiﬁed at the beginnings
of each chapter, and they are not guaranteed to provide all the information that is in the
original lectures. Hence, these notes should be considered to be a supplement to, rather than
a replacement for, the original lectures and the primary text material. Nevertheless, students
in this class over the past several years have found them to be useful.
All required reading will also be available online, except for the DSP text by Oppenheim, Schafer,
Yoder, and Padgett, which I assume you already have access to from previous courses.
Secondary reading material: For students who would like to consult other sources, the following
books are recommended as well:
• Comprehensive coverage of advanced digital signal processing and applications
1. Statistical and Adaptive Signal Processing, Manolakis, D. G., Ingle, V. K., and Kogon,
S. M. (2005), Artech House Publishers. This is an excellent comprehensive review of
statistical signal processing techniques that are covered in this course.
2. Statistical Digital Signal Processing and Modeling, Hayes, M. (1996), Wiley.
This is
another excellent and comprehensive review. It is currently out of print, but used copies
are available on Amazon.com.
3. Advanced Digital Signal Processing, Proakis, J. G., Rader, C. M., Ling, F., and Nikias, C.
L. (1992), Macmillan. This book covers similar ground as that of Lim and Oppenheim,
with somewhat better coverage of linear prediction. Unfortunately, it is also out of print.
Copyright 2024, Richard M. Stern

18-792 Syllabus
Page 4
Fall, 2024
• Power spectral estimation
1. Digital Spectral Analysis with Applications, Marple, S. L. (1989), Prentice-Hall, is an
intuitive, practical treatment of the material, again out of print but available via Ama-
zon.com.
2. Modern Spectral Estimation: Theory and Application, Kay, S. M. (1999), Prentice-Hall,
is more thorough and mathematical than Marple’s text.
• Signal processing for speech applications, including short-time Fourier analysis
and linear prediction
1. Theory and Application of Speech Processing, Rabiner, L. R. and Schafer, R. W. (2010),
Pearson.
2. Discrete-Time Signal Processing of Speech: Principles and Practice, Quatieri, T. F.
(2001), Pearson.
The former book is an updated version of the classic text on speech processing. The latter
book covers similar ground from a slightly diﬀerent point of view. Both books also contain
excellent treatment of a number of other one-dimensional signal processing techniques.
• Adaptive ﬁltering and adaptive array processing
1. Adaptive Signal Processing, Widrow, B. and Stearns, S. D. (1985). Prentice-Hall. This
is a good introductory treatment of adaptive ﬁltering and adaptive array processing.
2. Adaptive Filter Theory (5th Edition), Haykin, S. (2013), Prentice-Hall. This is the latest
in texts by Haykin on this subject. The presentation is more rigorous and comprehensive
and less intuitive than that of Widrow and Stearns.
Homework: Problem sets will usually be released by Thursday evening of each week. They will
be discussed extensively (along with useful hints on how to solve the problems) on the Friday the
morning after, and are generally due to be turned in via Gradescope by Friday at 0100 EDT/EST of
the following week. The lowest homework grade will not be included in the ﬁnal grade computation,
as was noted above. In addition, to provide additional ﬂexibility in dealing with surges in competing
demands on your time, we will accept up to ﬁve additional late submission days over the course
of the semester, with a maximum of two such late days available per assignment. Questions about
the homework will be answered during the oﬃce hours of the following week
A signiﬁcant component of the homework will be computer assignments using MATLAB . We have
found that students beneﬁt highly from having individual access to MATLAB . A site-licensed ver-
sion of MATLAB can be downloaded from the CMU Andrew software site. Students will also have
the option of allowing students to complete these assignments in Python, although the documen-
tation and support for Python is not as complete and is not guaranteed to cover everything.
Late homework policy: In addition to our dropping the lowest homework grade (which of course
means that you can opt out completely of one homework assignment during the semester), we will
allow each student ﬁve (5) free late days, each carrying a deadline extension of 24 hours, with a
maximum of two (2) for each assignment. After the “free” late days are used, the grades for late
homework will be discounted according to how many days each assignment is late.
Copyright 2024, Richard M. Stern

18-792 Syllabus
Page 5
Fall, 2024
An encouraging note: This is one of those rare courses where students tell us on the FCEs that
they actually enjoy working the homework problems!
Oﬃce hours: Each of the three of us on the teaching team will be available for two hours per
week for oﬃce hours. Based on prior experience, we currently plan to have one oﬃce hour on each
of Monday and Tuesday, and two oﬃce hours on Wednesday and Thursday. Times will be based
on a quick poll of student availability.
Examinations: There will be two in-class exams on October 9 and November 20, plus a ﬁnal
exam during the regular ﬁnal exam period, at a date to be announced later in the semester. Please
arrange your other commitments so as not to conﬂict with these dates. Make-up exams will not be
given unless there are extremely compelling reasons.
Grades: Grades will be based in part on performance in two or three examinations (nominally
55-65% of the ﬁnal grade) and the homework and project assignments (35-45%).
The lowest
homework assignment grade will be excluded from the ﬁnal grade calculations and the ﬁnal exam
will be weighted 1.5 times each midterm exam.
18-792 home page: We will be maintaining a home page for 18-792 which may be accessed
through the URL http://www.ece.cmu.edu/~ece792/.
We will be putting all course handouts (with the exception of homework and exam solutions),
reference documents, and other information on the 18-792 home page. The pages will also include
the MATLAB scripts used for classroom demos and other material presented in the lectures. We
will be using the Canvass site for grade reporting, using Piazza for discussions, and Gradescope for
homework submission.
******
A word or two about diversity and inclusion
The engineering profession has historically been one of the primary means by which people from
humble origins, as well as members of minority groups, have been able to advance their social
and economic status circumstances. Lamentably, in this country and around the world, people
over the years have suﬀered from discrimination on the basis of their race, religion, ethnic origin,
sexual preference, gender identity, and disability, along with a ton of other circumstances that I
am probably not thinking of as I write this. The multiple killings of people of color by various
police oﬃcers during the spring of 2020 has highlighted the extent to which endemic bias and
discrimination can and does have lethal consequences. Nevertheless, it is the implicit bias that
shades many of our day-to-day interactions that is more likely to aﬀect many of us on a more
ongoing basis.
It is our challenge and responsibility as engineers to support everyone with whom we work with
and live, regardless of race, ethnicity, or other circumstance, and to treat everyone the same, based
on merit alone. The tragedies of Spring 2020, which of course continue to this day, have sparked
Copyright 2024, Richard M. Stern

18-792 Syllabus
Page 6
Fall, 2024
a useful conversation, although fundamental change remains quite diﬃcult and elusive. Let us all
strive to work toward constructive change both at the societal level and in our day-to-interactions
with each other.
One response to the George Floyd murder in 2020 and similar killings over the years has been the
establishment of programs at all levels of our University to address and hopefully ameliorate these
endemic problems at least to some degree. The ECE Diversity, Inclusion, and Outreach Committee
has worked for a number of years to support all of our communities and to identify issues that come
up in our own classes and research programs.
https://www.ece.cmu.edu/student-resources/dio.html
Please contact us at any time with suggestions on how the DIO committee can better serve our
Department.
******
Academic stress and sources of help
This course, along with many others at CMU, can be extremely demanding. Because of these
pressures, the Provost’s oﬃce has issued the following statement, which I fully endorse:
Take care of yourself. Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well,
exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This
will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us beneﬁt from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to
ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, diﬃcult life events, or feelings like anxi-
ety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Counseling and Psychological Services
(CaPS) is here to help: call 412-268-2922 and visit their website at http://www.cmu.edu/counseling.
Consider reaching out to a friend, faculty or family member you trust for help getting connected
to the support that can help.
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call someone immediately,
day or night:
• CaPS: 412-268-2922
• resolve Crisis Network: 888-796-8226
If the situation is life threatening, call the police:
• On campus: CMU Police: 412-268-2323
Copyright 2024, Richard M. Stern

18-792 Syllabus
Page 7
Fall, 2024
• Oﬀcampus: 911
If you have questions about this or about your coursework, please let me know.
******
Academic integrity
Although it is unfortunate in a university like Carnegie Mellon, I ﬁnd it necessary to call your
attention to the various university policies on academic integrity.
Please understand that we take any form of cheating or plagiarism very seriously. As a scientist or
engineer your reputation is of supreme importance. It is simply not worth sacriﬁcing the integrity
with which you are known for something as trivial and transitory as a homework or exam grade
on a course. And in the end, your throrough mastery of the course material, which you can only
attain by doing your own work, will be far more valuable to you than the grade you receive for this
course.
In this course it is considered acceptable (and even desirable) for students to discuss the general
approach to be taken for homework problems and lab projects with each other. Nevertheless, work
handed in for grading must be a product of your own individual eﬀort, so solutions which are nearly
exact copies of one another are evidence of an unacceptable collaboration. Looking up solutions to
problems on the Web is not permitted under any circumstances, nor is using any information from
exams and homework sets from previous years in this course. Finally, all work turned in on exams
must represent your eﬀorts alone.
This year for the ﬁrst time we are becoming concerned about the potential utility of the use of
generative AI tools (such as ChatGPT and its competitors) for providing inappropriate assistance
in completing the homework assignments, including especially the homework problems. For the
time being, the use of generative AI tools in completing your homework assignments is strictly
prohibited. It is understood that the creative use of these technologies can be useful in this course,
and suggestions from anyone on how to better combine generative AI tools in this course are
appreciated, and the strict prohibition against AI tools may be modiﬁed if circumstances warrant
such a change.
The ECE