Carnegie Mellon University 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
18-490 
 
    
 
 
 
                                                         Fall 2024 
Electroacoustics 
Course Syllabus 
 
Instructor 
 
Tom Sullivan  
 
tms@ece.cmu.edu 
Office:  HH A-209 
 
x8-3351 
 
I’m not scheduling regular ‘office hours’.  The class is small enough that if you’d like to meet, just 
contact me and we’ll set up a time to chat (either in person or over zoom) that works for your schedule. 
 
 
 
  
 
Teaching Assistant 
 
Unfortunately no TA this semester.   
 
Course Management 
 
ECE Academic Services Center 
 
HH1113  
 
Course Web Page 
 
We will use Canvas for our Web Page this semester.  You should attempt to access the page as soon as 
possible to ensure that you have access to the course materials.  
 
Students are responsible for any information conveyed via announcements made in lecture and/or 
on the course web page.  Absence from class the day of an important announcement does not 
excuse you from being responsible for that information. 

 
 
Textbooks 
Electroacoustics by W. Marshall Leach (Kendall-Hunt Publishing)  4th Edition 
Acoustics by Leo Beranek, first published in 1954 (!) and now republished (and only very slightly 
updated) by the Acoustical Society of America.   
Acoustics_ Sound Fields, Transducers and Vibration by Leo Beranek and Tim Mellow, Academic Press, 
2019 
The fundamental material of the course has not really changed all that much in that time, though the 
Leach book provides a more contemporary treatment of the material.  Beranek’s book has a lot of useful 
tables and formulae in it to which we will refer and has a very thorough treatment of the material.  The 
Mellow book is a (mostly) updated version of the Beranek book. 
Other reference texts: While we chose the texts by Leach and Beranek because of their depth and goals 
for this course, there are a number of other good books out there.  Interested readers may wish to consult 
with the following texts: 
The Fundamentals of Physical Acoustics by D. E. Blackstock (Wiley, 2000).  
Acoustics, by Kinsler and Frey et. al,  (Wiley, 2001) 
The Science of Sound by T. D. Rossing, F. R. Moore, and P. A. Wheeler (3rd son-Wesley, 2001) 
 
Course Meeting Info: 
 
Lectures: 
 
Tuesday and Thursday, 9:30 – 10:50 AM, WeH 8427 
 
Overview of the course:  
This course provides an introduction to physical, engineering, and architectural acoustics.  The course 
begins with a review of the wave equation and some of its solutions that are relevant to the propagation 
of sound from planar and spherical sources, and from arrays of simple sources.  Lumped-parameter elec-
trical circuit analogies are developed to describe mechanical and acoustical systems, leading to a 
discussion of the constraints and tradeoffs involved in the design of loudspeakers, microphones, and 
other transducers.  The characteristics of sound in regular and irregular enclosures will be developed and 
discussed in the context of the acoustical design of rooms and auditoriums.  The interaction of sound and 
man is also discussed, with introductory lectures on auditory perception and speech production.  Given 
time, we may have some lectures with applications in the areas of efficient perceptually-based coding of 
music and speech, and virtual acoustical environments.  
The study of acoustics is challenging because the wavelengths of sound are both long and short  
compared to the size of typical devices that produce or monitor sound, such as loudspeakers, 
microphones, and the human head.  As a consequence, we will examine generation and propagation of 
sound using three types of mathematical frameworks: distributed-parameter modeling (in the context of 
topics such as travelling waves, plane waves, boundary conditions, and simple sources), lumped-
parameter modeling (in the context of topics such as mechanical and acoustic circuits, with applications 
to the design of transducers, mufflers, etc.), and statistical modeling (in the context of architectural 
acoustics and the design of auditoriums).  
 

 
 
 
Homework: 
 
Doing homework is integral to understanding the course material.  Please take the time to do your 
homework.  It is weighted high in this course (equivalent to the weight of one exam) to encourage you to 
work on it.  Exams will be difficult if you haven't worked the homework problems.  I am not yet sure of 
the homework schedule, since it will somewhat depend on how we progress through the material, but it 
will be “roughly” weekly and will be available on the Canvas page when announced to you either in 
class or via email.  It will be due at the beginning of lecture on the due dates.   No late homework will 
be accepted (a "late" homework is one that is turned in more than 5 minutes after the scheduled 
beginning of lecture on the due date), as solutions will be posted to the web page shortly after the set is 
due. 
 
I will allow “group” homework on most assignments.  A “group” will have a maximum size of two.  If 
you choose to partner up with someone to do homework, I would only like to receive one copy of the 
homework, with both names on the paper.  Please don’t use this as an opportunity to “take turns” or 
“each do half of the problems”.  I may require individual homework on a few of the sets.  This will be 
noted on the homework handout.  On exams, you will need to do your own work so it is in everyone’s 
best interest to be integrally involved in the solutions to the homework problems. 
 
Emphasis in this course will be on people learning new material, so I’d like you to fret less about your 
grade and instead concentrate on getting as much as you can out of the class. 
 
Exams: 
 
Three 24-hour take-home exams will be given during the semester and will take place on the following 
dates, please reserve them in your schedule (and plan interview trips, plant trips, etc. accordingly): 
 
Thursday, October 10 (week 7)  
Thursday, November 21 (week 12) 
Thursday, December 5 (comprehensive Final exam, week 14) 
 
On exam days, the exam will be posted in Gradescope and on Canvas by 9:30 am.  I will be available 
then during the normal lecture time to answer any basic questions about the exam (format, problem 
statements, etc.).  You then have until 9:30 AM the day after the exam is handed out to upload your final 
solutions to Gradescope.  NO LATE EXAMS WILL BE ACCEPTED! All exams will be considered 
to be “comprehensive”, meaning that material learned earlier in the course is fair game on all exams. 
(The material builds throughout the semester.) 
 
There will be no formal final examination given during the final examination period this semester.  
Exam III will be considered your “final” exam. 
 

 
 
Grading: 
 
25%  Homework 
 
 
 
 
 
(lowest score dropped) 
 
 
 
25% each, take-home exams 
 
Course grades will be assigned via comparing your score to that of your classmates.  Groupings of 
similar performance in the course will be given similar grades. 
 
Re-grades 
 
You have 1 week from the time an exam or homework assignment is returned to ask for a re-grade.  Be 
aware that a request for a re-grade of any portion of an exam or homework assignment means that the 
entire exam or homework assignment is subject to re-grade, and that there is a possibility that your grade 
could be lowered as well as raised by this process.  We will only re-grade an exam if you feel an 
extreme grading error has been made. 
 
Exam Taking Policy(s) 
 
All exams are to be taken during the scheduled exam dates and time.  Make-up exams are highly 
discouraged.  If you are unable to take an exam at the scheduled time (for a valid reason, which means 
extreme emergencies), you must meet with the instructor within one week of the originally scheduled 
exam time to schedule a make-up exam, else you will receive a zero for that exam.  Make-ups will be 
given at the convenience of the instructor and will generally be more difficult than the originally 
scheduled exam.  The format of the make-up exam is up to the instructor.   
 
If you have special circumstances approved by the Disabled Student Services office, it is up to you to 
make arrangements with the instructor at least 72 hours before the scheduled exam time.  Failure to do 
so will result in you taking the exam in the same place and at the same time (and for the same length of 
time) as the rest of the class. 
 
Cheating: 
 
The take-home exams and group homework are not the norm for most courses in our department.  I’m 
really putting my trust in all of you to do your own work and to participate fully.  You are not to look at 
any materials from past semesters that this course was given, as some of the exams and assignments may 
be re-used this semester.  The material in this course is such that everyone will do things her/his own 
way so it will be pretty obvious to us if cheating has occurred.  Any student caught cheating in this 
course will receive an R and the facts of the case and the penalty will be reported to the Dean of Student 
Affairs.  While students may work in groups to discuss homework assignments, copying from other’s 
homework (present or past years or past year’s solutions) or exam or allowing another student to copy 
his/her work, will be considered as cheating.  
 

 
 
Topics in (probable) order of course coverage  
 
Introduction to sound and acoustics 
The wave equation and its solutions 
1-d wave equation solutions: travelling waves and complex amplitudes. 
Travelling waves, standing waves, and acoustic impedance. 
Reflections, impedance, and the standing wave ratio (SWR) 
Simple sources and arrays of sources. 
Applications to sound reinforcement 
Acoustical energy and intensity 
Generalized lumped-parameter elements 
Dual networks and mechanical circuits 
Acoustic elements and circuits 
Radiation impedance and directivity of radiation 
Introduction to transducers 
Introduction to microphones and their design 
Introduction to loudspeaker design 
Loudspeaker enclosures and contemporary design approaches 
Sound in regular enclosures 
Sound in irregular enclosures 
Design of modern auditoria for music and speech 
 
Possible special topics: 
 
Auditory Perception 
Hearing impairment 
Acoustics of speech production 
MPEG audio coding 
Power amp design 
Noise control in buildings 
Guest lectures 

 
 
ABET Student outcomes for ECE programs: 
 
1. An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles 
of engineering, science, and mathematics. 
2. An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with 
consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, 
environmental, and economic factors. 
3. An ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences. 
4. An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and 
make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, 
economic, environmental, and societal contexts. 
5. An ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a 
collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives. 
6. An ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and 
use engineering judgment to draw conclusions. 
7. An ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies. 

 
 
ECE