Business Fundamentals 
18-602 
Spring 2025 
 
 
Tuesday / Thursday 2:00 to 3:20 Posner 152 
 
 
 
David Lamont  
Tepper 5203 – PhD area on 5th floor 
dl0d@andrew.cmu.edu 
412-268-7578 Office  
412-608-4933 mobile 
 
Teaching Assistants 
 
 
 
 
Grading 
Individual Assignments: 
New product launch draft 
 
 
 
25 
Finance homework assignment (2 parts) 
 
25 
Accounting homework assignment 
 
 
25 
Finance Exam  
 
 
 
 
50 
Accounting exam 
 
 
 
 
50 
Game team peer evaluation   
 
 
 
Early evaluation  
 
 
 
25 
 
Final evaluation 
 
 
 
25 
Peer assessed participation-new product launch 
 
 
Early Evaluation 
 
 
25 
 
 
Late Evaluation 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
Subtotal 
 
275 
 
Simulation Team Assignments: 
Simulation Strategic Plan –Presentations 
 
25 
Simulation Year 1 Review and Year 2 Plan  
25 
Simulation Year 3 Final Presentation  
 
25 
Performance in Simulation 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
Subtotal 
 
100 
 
 
New Product Launch Team Assignments? 
 

New Product Launch – Part 1  
                        25 
New Product launch marketing plan – Part 2  
25 
New product launch Final Project 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
Subtotal 
 
75 
 
TOTAL POSSIBLE  
 
 
 
450 
 
 
 
 
 
The purpose of the class is to introduce basic business management concepts and to make the 
connections between various business decision making frameworks so that you can use the 
topics to holistically approach complex unstructured business problems. 
We will cover 6 basic areas of management: 
 
Economics Topics 
Microeconomics – Text: Microeconomics and Behavior, Robert H Frank, 9th Edition, McGraw 
Hill 
Macroeconomics – No Text. Notes provided 
 
Accounting Topics  
Text:  Financial Accounting for MBA’s, Easton, Wild,Halsey, McAnally, 7th Edition Cambridge 
Business Publishers. Chapters   
1. Financial Accounting 
2. Financial Statement analysis 
 
Finance Topics 
Text:  Brealey and Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance 6th Edition; Ch 2,3,7,8, 
1. The time value of money and the Capital Asset Pricing Model 
2. Risk and portfolio theory 
3. Corporate finance - controller and treasury functions - Capital budgeting and capital 
structure. 
 
Marketing Topics 
Text: Phil Cotler Principles of Marketing – Chapters 1,6,13 
1. Buyer Behavior models 
2. Marketing Communications 
 
Operations Management Topics 
Text: Chase, Jacobs, Aquilano; Operations Management For Competitive Advantage 10th Edition 
Chapters 1,7,9,11 
 
Quality Management  
 
Supply chain integration 
 
Lean Manufacturing Techniques 
 
Strategy Topics 
Text:  Hill Jones; Strategic Management An Integrated Approach 8th Edition; Ch 5,6,7 
1. Strategy formulation fundamentals 
2. Strategy implementation fundamental 

 
The class will have a dual thread.  We will teach theory and applications in a conventional 
lecture format.  To reinforce these ideas and to show an integrated view of business, we will 
thread a simulated competition through the class as well as a new product launch semester 
project.  For the simulation exercise, you will be placed on teams of 4 - 5 and you will run a 
computer-simulated US-based multi-national manufacturing company for 3 years in an oligopic 
market.  The simulation will cause you to apply the ideas learned in class to a complex, dynamic, 
and very unstructured business problem.  The inter-related nature of business decision-making 
becomes very apparent as you formulate strategies and then attempt to carry them out and deliver 
value for your owners.  Each team will be coached as needed to make sure that their level of 
understanding evolves as they move through the exercise.  The goal is to leave the participants 
with the view of a general manager of a profit center in a multi-national company.  The new 
product launch project will progress through self-formed teams based on what kind of new 
product you wish to launch.  This journey will progress from problem definition and customer 
validation to a marketing plan, an operational plan and a financing plan ending with a product 
launch strategy and implementation plan.  The goal of this new product launch project is to 
prepare you to build and manage a new product launch for any product or service you might 
encounter in the future. The simulation will give you the product manager’s experience in a large 
established organization.  The new product launch project will give you the start-up experience. 
 
Goals of the class: 
 
Expose you to the major aspects of management so you can decide which advanced classes 
might be interesting to you or might be inappropriate for you. 
 
Show you how the international banking system works and how stock markets and bond markets 
price the claims of corporate assets. 
 
Show you how to use management skills to solve dynamic unstructured problems. 
 
Show you how business disciplines are used to manage products and services in an established 
company setting. 
 
Give you the skills to build and manage a new product launch in a start-up setting. 
 
Teach you how to manage and participate in a team decision-making effort which is truly 
integrated. 
 
Provide you with opportunities to practice your presentation skills to an executive-level 
audience. If you cannot effectively communicate your ideas, they don’t get adopted by others. 
 
 
Things you will be able to do: 
 
Read and understand financial statements. 
 
Interpret financial information as a stock market or bond market would interpret the same 
information. 

 
Use cost allocation schemes to make better pricing decisions for goods and services. 
 
Design marketing programs for goods and services. 
 
Build operational strategies and implementation plans to balance risk and flexibility 
 
Build and manage business models around technology to solve problems for customers 
 
Craft and manage dynamic strategies to build a business around technology solutions 
 
Evaluate production environments and match them to strategies in competitive markets. 
 
Build a presentation that effectively communicates business results to an executive audience. 
 
Participation rate and Attendance 
 
As much of your grade is determined by the team activities, you receive the team score on 
assignments if and only if you participate in the team’s efforts.  If you do not participate at a 
meaningful level, you will receive an individual score on the team assignment which will be zero 
or sharply lower than the team’s score.  I will determine whether your level of participation is 
sufficient to receive the team’s score or a different individual one.  Here are two examples: 
 
1. You work to prepare for a team presentation but can’t attend due to a last minute medical 
issue.  Someone else takes over your part of the meeting.  In this case, your level of 
participation is perfectly normal.  You did your part but someone else filled in for you at 
the meeting because you just could not get there.  Things like this are normal 
2. You don’t do any work to prepare for a Team activity but you attend the meeting and talk 
through a few slides given to you by teammates.  In this case, your level of participation is 
not adequate to receive the team’s score.  You will receive a lower individual score or zero 
for your lower contribution. 
3. You don’t attend team meetings, you miss deadlines and do only minimal work.  You will 
be fired, removed from the team, and expected to complete all remaining work in the class 
as a single individual.   
 
Class attendance is not formally part of your grade in the class but class attendance is 
critically to your understanding of the material and the performance of your team.  This is 
especially true in the early part of the class.  You are expected to attend the class meeting 
synchronously.  I don’t want anyone attending class if you are now feeling well.  To support 
the collective health of the class, I will make every effort to include everyone in each class 
session including those who may be sick.  Please don’t take advantage of this flexibility. 
 
At any time, I may choose to take attendance.  If you are present, I will award 10 bonus points.  
These points will be added as an attendance assignment in the grade book thus increasing the total 
number of points possible. 
 
Example:  You never attend class but receive a perfect score on every assignment.  I decide to take 
attendance 6 times during the semester thus adding a total of 60 points to the total possible.  Your 

final grade in the class will be X / (X+60) where X is the total number or points assigned in the 
syllabus at the start of the class.  If X = 600, your final grade will be 600/660 = 90.9% which would 
be an A- (even though you achieved a perfect score on every assignment).   
 
Late work / Make up work 
 
Team assignments cannot be made up.    Much of the work in this class are team assignments.  
You can participate in team assignments remotely using technology as needed.   
 
Accommodations for Students with Disabilities: 
If you have a disability and have an accommodations letter from the Disability Resources office, 
I encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs with me as early in the semester as 
possible. I will work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate. If you 
suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from accommodations but are not yet 
registered with the Office of Disability Resources, I encourage you to contact them at 
access@andrew.cmu.edu. 
 
Student Wellness 
 
It is important to me that you work to maintain a healthy work / life balance.  I have structured 
the class thoughtfully to distribute the work overtime to give you the ability to manage the work.  
I have inserted blocks of free time in advance of larger assignments to permit you to be 
successful.  If you need help at any time, either in understanding or managing the work, it is your 
responsibility to seek my help and advice.     
 
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like 
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Counseling and Psychological 
Services (CaPS) is here to help: call 412-268-2922 and visit their website 
athttp://www.cmu.edu/counseling/. Consider reaching out to a friend, faculty or family member 
you trust for help getting connected to the support that can help. 
 
Use of Technology 
 
For some classes, we will need to use laptop computers to engage in certain activities so 
everyone should bring a laptop to each class.  However, unless you are specifically told to open 
the computer for some class activity, I expect them to be put away and not visible to me or 
anyone else.  I expect all mobile devices to be silenced and put away including cell phones, and 
wearable devices.  These devices distract you and others and prevent active participation and 
learning. 
 
Use of Generative AI Tools 
 
I encourage you to use any tools you wish to attack any problem in this class.  If you use GenAI 
tools as an aid in completing any work in this class, you must disclose such use in the assignment.  
However, beyond disclosing the use of what tools, I impose no further restrictions.  Remember, 
your work should truly be your work.  If you use AI tools to get started, that’s fine but your 
thoughts and insights should be added so the work becomes your own. 

 
Diversity creates value for all and should be both a celebrated and protected part of our time 
together 
We are diverse in many ways, and this diversity is fundamental to building and maintaining an 
equitable and inclusive campus community where everyone feels safe. Diversity can refer to 
multiple ways that we identify ourselves. Each diverse dimension of identity, shapes the 
perspectives our students, faculty, and staff bring to our campus. We, will work to promote 
diversity, equity and inclusion not only because diversity fuels excellence and innovation, but 
because we want to pursue justice. 
Each of us is responsible for creating a safer, more inclusive environment.  To create a safe 
environment, we must respect everyone and listen to their perspectives.  We are free to challenge 
ideas.  I expect and hope you will challenge ideas put forth by others.  We are not free to 
challenge the identity of others.  That damages our sense of community. 
Unfortunately, incidents of bias or discrimination do occur, whether intentional or unintentional. 
They contribute to creating an unwelcoming environment for individuals and groups at the 
university. Therefore, the university encourages anyone who experiences or observes unfair or 
hostile treatment on the basis of identity to speak out for justice and support, within the moment 
of the incident or after the incident has passed. Anyone can share these experiences using the 
following resources: 
 
Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion: csdi@andrew.cmu.edu, (412) 268-2150 
 
Ethics Reporting Hotline. Students, faculty, and staff can anonymously file a report by calling 844-587-
0793 or visiting cmu.ethicspoint.com.  
 
 
Recording of Class Sessions 
 
This class has an in-person expectation.  There is no plan to record and distribute class content.  
If you miss a class, you are responsible for finding out what you missed.  Anyone who wants to 
record our class sessions using their own technology may do so as long as your actions do not 
intrude on the functioning of the class AND as long as you do not record other students without 
their permission.