1  
  
  
 
  
Course Description  
  
An introduction to the fundamental principles and methodologies of classical feedback control and 
its applications. Emphasis is on problem formulation and the analysis and synthesis of 
servomechanisms using frequency and time domain techniques. Topics include analytical, 
graphical, and computer-aided (MATLAB) techniques for analyzing and designing automatic 
control systems; analysis of performance, stability criteria, realizability, and speed of response; 
compensation methods in the frequency domain; systems with delay and computer control 
systems; transfer function and state space modeling of linear dynamic physical systems; 
nonlinearities in control systems; and control engineering software (MATLAB). The full list of 
topics, timelines, reading materials, and (future) lecture note can be found in this website.  
https://yorie.notion.site/F24-18370-Fundamentals-of-Control-
ea8706eebdd841d28850cd65f5721b7a?pvs=4 
  
Prerequisite: 18220 or 18290 or 24352 
ECE Undergraduate Course Area: Signals and Systems  
ECE Undergraduate Course Designation: Breadth  
 
Learning objectives   
  
In this class, you will  
• Learn the basics of control theory (see semester schedule for the list of topics)  
• Design and conduct experiments, as well as analyze and interpret data  
• Design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs within realistic constraints 
such as safety and robustness   
• Identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems  
 
Through these experiences, you will improve  
• Understanding for control systems  
• The knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering  
• Brainstorming, information gathering, and technical writing skills   
  
  
  
  
  
  
18 - 370   Fundamentals of Control 
   
Fall2024    
 
 
 
Lecture times: MW 1:00 PM-2:50PM 
  
  
Lecture location: GHC 5222 
  
Units: 12  
 

2  
  
• Your ability to plan a project, manage time, and work with people   
 
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education.  In the context 
of ABET to ensure the quality of your education.  The following list describes which objectives 
are fulfilled by this course and in what manner they are fulfilled. 
 
1. an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying 
principles of engineering, science, and mathematics 
5. an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, 
create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet 
objectives 
6. an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, 
and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions 
7. an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning 
strategies. 
 
 
Instructor information  
  
Instructor: Yorie Nakahira   
 
Contacts for the class: If you need to contact us, please send us private message via Piazza. The 
instructor and TAs are taking turns to monitor Piazza 7 days a week. The personal email address 
of the instructors and TAs aren’t necessarily monitored during travel and weekend.   
  
Office hours and location: Please check canvas announcement for the location and zoom link for 
the office hours.   
 
Learning Resources   
 
Textbooks: This class uses the following two textbooks.   
Åström, K. J., & Murray, R. M. Feedback Systems: An Introduction for Scientists and Engineers, 
Second Edition.  
Doyle, John C., Bruce A. Francis, and Allen R. Tannenbaum. Feedback control theory. Courier 
Corporation, 2013.  
 
Canvas: Canvas will provide additional materials and homework assignments. Submit your 
assignments through Canvas. To access the course canvas from an Andrew Machine, go to the 
login page at: https://canvas.cmu.edu/courses/43395. You should check the course canvas for 
announcements.  
 
MATLAB/Simulink: We will use MATLAB and Simulink in class and in homework assignments.   
  
Piazza: This is the link: https://piazza.com/cmu/fall2024/18370/home 
Before you can access this link, you should sign up through the following link.  

3  
  
https://piazza.com/cmu/fall2024/18370 
The sign up link requires access code, which is given in the first day of class.  
 
If you have any questions, you can either come to the office hours or ask questions in Piazza.   
 
Assessment Descriptions and Grading Policies  
 
Homeworks: The exact homework due date will be announced on canvas, after the materials of 
covered by individual homework are covered in the class. Homework sets will comprise problems 
that reinforce learning and understanding material from the lecture and textbook. You may discuss 
in groups on homework, but each individual needs to solve the problems by yourself. Homework 
answers will be posted on canvas 2 days after the due date. We highly encourage you to review 
past homework assignments in a timely manner. In general, timely reviews will allow you to learn 
from past mistakes and better understand the materials.   
  
Projects: The projects will be graded based on the report and experiment results. You are 
encouraged to search for materials in textbooks and external resources for the projects. Please cite 
all external materials and include the chapter number and algorithm names used. Sample project 
report (solutions) will be posted on canvas 2 days after the due date.   
 
Attendance and participation policy: In the beginning of the class, we will collect attendance 
sheet. Please indicate full attendance or partial attendance. Partial attendances are defined by late 
arrival and departure before end of lectures (absence in Q&A times and office hours will not be 
penalized). Partial attendance receives 50% of credit for full attendance. You have 3 points of 
allowance for full absence (6 times of partial attendance) without any penalty. Attendance will not 
be collected on dates when the lectures are delivered via zoom or in the days of mid-term or final 
exams. While we may not always check the accuracy of your input, false statement is a violation 
of integrity, and deliberate false statements may be reported. Here, false statement includes 
reporting the attendance to a class that is not attended or reporting full attendance for partially 
attended classes.  
 
Attendance and participation are important to get the most from this course. In the past years, 
students who attend the class and actively answer questions during the class tended to perform 
better in assignments. We will also expect to receive important information about homework and 
project assignment.  
 
Mid-term and final exams: The exam questions will be based on all materials taught in the class 
one week before the exams. We encourage students to review lecture notes and homework 
questions when preparing for the exam.   
 
If you cannot attend the exam due to urgent medical issues, please contact the instructor before the 
exam to discuss the options. Missed exams (due to absence) receive 0 points.   
 
Grade compositions: The final course grade will be calculated using the following categories:  
 

4  
  
  Assessment  
Percentage of Final Grade  
Homeworks  
40%  
Projects  
10%  
Class attendance 
15% 
Mid-term exam (Oct 9th)  
15% 
Final exam 
20%  
 
Late homework policy: We understand there can be some unexpected circumstances such as 
illness, attendance of events, or family emergencies. Accordingly, each student can be late for 
homework assignments for 4 days throughout the semester, and at most 2 days per homework, 
without receiving any penalties. These late allowances are designed to accommodate unexpected 
circumstances, not expected circumstances (such as assignments from other classes). Homework 
submitted beyond late allowance or after the distribution of solution (2 days after original due date) 
will receive 0 grades.  Late allowances do not need to be requested. We will automatically account 
for it in credit assignments. 
  
We want to credit students who submit homeworks in a timely manner. Please be reminded that 
one important learning objective of this class is also to manage time. So, we will not give special 
extensions beyond the late allowances for students without disabilities to be fair. Homeworks 
submitted after the distribution of solutions (2 days after the due date) or exceeding the late 
allowances (within 2 days after the due date per homework, within a total of 4 days throughout the 
semester) will not be graded and will receive 0 points.   
  
Late project policy: Each team has 2 days of late allowances for project reports throughout the 
semester. These allowances can be used for one project, or distributed between projects, without 
receiving any penalties. These late allowances are intended for unexpected circumstances such as 
illness, attendance of events, or family emergencies, not expected circumstances (typical problems 
when working with the team). Please be reminded that one important learning objective of this 
class is also to learn how to manage time effectively and work with people. So similarly, we will 
not give special extensions beyond the late allowances for teams composed of students without 
disabilities. This will also leave us with the option of scaling up the grades fairly when only a small 
portion of students receive A or B. Projects submitted after the distribution of solutions (2 days 
after the due date) will not be graded and will receive 0 points. Late allowances do not need to be 
requested. We will automatically account for it in credit assignments. 
  
Request for homework re-grade: A request to re-grade for all assignments (homeworks and 
projects) must be submitted via GradeScope within 1 weeks after the grades are posted. A request 
to re-grade for the final exam must be submitted via GradeScope by the date specified (this date 
will be determined after the final exam schedule comes out). Please be informed that there is a 
deadline for final grade submission, so please submit the request as soon as you find out. We 
encourage students to review assignment and exam questions and revisit missed problems to 
improve your understanding.      

5  
  
  
Accommodations for students with disabilities: If you have a disability and require 
accommodations, please contact Catherine Getchell, Director of Disability Resources, 412-268-
6121, getchell@cmu.edu. If you have an accommodations letter from the Disability Resources 
office, I encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs with me as early in the semester 
as possible. I will work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate.  
Accommodations for students’ travel plans: If you are to miss classes or travel, below are things 
you can do: watch the lecture recordings; use your late assignments allowance if needed; and come 
to office hours if you have any questions.  
ECE