18-631 Introduction to Information Security 
 
Sec. RW: Mon/Wed 14:00-15:50 
 
Spring 2025, 12 Units     F203                                                            v3 Jan 17, 2025 
 
 
Instructors 
Tim Brown 
timxb@cmu.edu                   0787 674 062                    Office C206 
Office hours: Mon/Wed/Fri 4-5pm 
                     Get an appointment via https://calendly.com/timxb/15-minute-meeting 
João Barros 
jbarros@andrew.cmu.edu    0793 671 563                    Office D201 
Office hours: Mon 10-12, Wed 11-12, Thu 10-11 
 
Teaching Assistants 
Vital Ahishakiye 
vahishak@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: Tue/Thu 4-5pm in-person in D107 and remote via this Zoom link.  
Aline Umubyeyi 
alineu@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: Mon 7-8pm in-person in F307, Thu 5-6pm remote via this Zoom link 
Balambo Gloire 
bgloire@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office Hours: Wed 5-6pm Resource Center & Fri 4-5pm remote via this Zoom link 
Course Description 
Our growing reliance on information systems for daily activities, ranging from remote 
communications to financial exchanges, has made information security a central issue of our critical 
infrastructure. The course introduces the technical and policy foundations of information security. 
The main objective of the course is to enable students to reason about information systems from a 
security engineering perspective, taking into account technical, economic and policy factors. Topics 
covered in the course include elementary cryptography; access control; common software 
vulnerabilities; common network vulnerabilities; policy and export control laws, in the U.S., Japan, 
and elsewhere; privacy; management and assurance; economics of security; and special topics in 
information security. Prerequisites: The course assumes a basic working knowledge of computers, 
networks, C and UNIX programming, as well as an elementary mathematics background, but does 
not assume any prior exposure to topics in computer or communications security. Students lacking 
technical background (e.g., students without any prior exposure to programming) are expected to 
catch up through self-study.  
 
There are no prerequisites for this course.  
Learning Outcomes 
After completing this course, students should be able to reason about systems from the perspective 
of a security engineer. That is, they should be able to define the system to protect; determine the 
desired security properties for this system; identify the possible threats to these security properties 
 
​
​
​
​
1 
 

and their likelihood of occurrence; and consider possible mitigations against these threats. 
Learning Resources  
Reading materials will be available online. ​
In person: You are expected to bring your laptop and handwriting materials to every class.  
Remote: You are expected to attend every remote class through live Zoom sessions.  
Assessments 
The final course grade will be calculated using the following categories: 
 
 
Written assignments: You will submit ~12 written assignments over this 
course. Assignments are due 1 hour before the beginning of class on the 
due date. These will take the form of short laboratory exercises, hands-on 
activities, critical thinking to build proficiency in the tools and techniques 
taught in the class. You must complete these assignments individually and 
submit them as instructed in the assignment. Each assignment becomes a building block towards 
later assignments. It is important that you complete each assignment on time and completely.   
 
Participation: You are required to participate actively in class, both in your group discussions and 
also in plenary (all class) activities and teacher-led input sessions. In order to participate effectively, 
you are expected to have read and gained a working understanding of any assigned readings. Your 
reading comprehension will be assessed through your participation in Perusall (see below). In 
addition, to gain full marks, you need to participate in classroom discussions or other teacher-led 
stages of the lesson in at least 4 different classes. Participation in fewer than 4 classes will be 
awarded 50% of the marks. You will not be awarded any marks if you fail to participate in classroom 
activities and participate minimally in group discussions. This requirement aims to develop your 
ability to speak clearly and confidently on a range of technical topics and participate effectively in 
team activities. Note that you can’t participate if you don’t attend class. 
Grading Policies 
Late-work policy: Assignments received after their due date will lose 20% per day late unless a 
reason for the delay is sent to the instructor(s) and an extended deadline approved before the 
assignment is due.  
 
Re-grade policy:  If you consider that the grade you have received is incorrect or unfair, you may 
request a re-grade. Your regrade will be determined on the basis of meeting with one of the 
instructors. A request for a re-grade must be submitted to the instructor by email within one week of 
receiving the graded assignment.  
Course Policies 
Academic integrity & collaboration: Please refer to Appendix A below. 
 
Assignments: Students are encouraged to talk to each other, to the T.A., to the instructor, or to 
anyone else about any of the homework assignments. Any assistance, though, must be limited to 
 
​
​
​
​
2 
 
Percentage 
Grade 
≥ 93 
≥ 90 
  A 
  A- 
≥ 87 
≥ 83 
≥ 80 
  B+ 
  B 
  B- 
≥ 77 
≥ 73 
≥ 70 
  C+ 
  C 
  C- 
≥ 67 
≥ 63 
≥ 60 
  D+ 
  D 
  D- 
< 60 
R (F) 
Assessment 
Percentage of Grade 
Written assignments 
30% 
Midterm Exams 
30% 
Final Exam 
15% 
Project 
15% 
Participation + Quizzes + Perusal + EdPuzzle 
10% 

discussion of the problem and sketching general approaches to a solution. Each student must write 
out his or her own homework solutions. Consulting another student’s solution is prohibited, and 
submitted solutions may not be copied from any source. Copying from someone else’s homework 
(present, past years, past year’s solutions, etc.), lab write-up, or exam or allowing another student to 
copy his/her work, will be considered as cheating. Any form of collaboration is strictly prohibited on 
the exams and is considered cheating. If you collaborate with any other person on your assignment, 
list their name(s) at the top of the first page of your assignment. 
 
In-class expectations: We all need to work together to ensure the health and safety of all of us in 
and outside of the CMU community. In this environment, in-person participation is a privilege. 
Students who do not follow all health directives will be asked to leave and referred to the 
CMU-Africa Director.  
 
Perusall Reading assignments may use the tool Perusall which can be found on Canvas. Perusall 
allows us to read as a class and share annotations including comments and questions as well as 
responses to others’ comments and questions. It is graded on a simple 0 to 3 grading scale. You 
generally will get a 3 by reading the whole assignment, providing 5 to 7 meaningful annotations and 
voting on other students’ comments.  
 
EdPuzzle Asynchronous video assignments which will be watched through EdPuzzle. You should 
be familiar with how this works from orientation and other classes.  
 
Accommodations for students with disabilities: If you have a disability and require 
accommodations, please contact Olga Gikundiro, Student Services Officer, +250 784 644 833, 
gbuki@andrew.cmu.edu. If you have an accommodations letter from the student services office, we 
encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs with us as early in the semester as 
possible. We will work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate. 
 
Statement on student wellness: The last few years have been challenging. We are all under a lot 
of stress and uncertainty at this time. I encourage you to find ways to move regularly, eat well, and 
reach out to your support system or the instructors if you need to. As a student, you may experience 
a range of challenges that can interfere with learning, such as strained relationships, increased 
anxiety, substance use, feeling down, difficulty concentrating and/or lack of motivation. These 
mental health concerns or stressful events may diminish your academic performance and/or reduce 
your ability to participate in daily activities. Services are available for CMU-Africa students, and 
treatment does work. You can learn more about the confidential mental health services available by 
contacting Olga Gikundiro, Student Services Officer, +250 784 644 833, gbuki@andrew.cmu.edu. 
Free private counseling is available weekly. See the schedule outside the Wellness Room (room 
E307).  
 
Statement on student health: We all are subject to health issues. If health issues are impacting 
your ability to perform in your courses, please contact your instructors as soon as possible so that 
we can support you during this period.  
 
Mobile devices: Mobile phones must be switched off or on silent and put away during all classes. If 
you have a specific reason why you need to be able to check your phone during class time, you 
must seek permission from the instructors in advance of the class. If you are seen using a mobile 
phone in class, you will be asked to put it away. If you persist in using your phone, you will be asked 
to leave the class. Laptops may be placed on desks but must be closed unless specific instruction to 
use them is given.  
 
 
​
​
​
​
3 
 

Appendix A 
The Carnegie Mellon Code 
 
Students at Carnegie Mellon, because they are members of an academic community dedicated to 
the achievement of excellence, are expected to meet the highest standards of personal, ethical 
and moral conduct possible. 
These standards require personal integrity, a commitment to honesty without compromise, 
as well as truth without equivocation and a willingness to place the good of the community above 
the good of the self. Obligations once undertaken must be met, commitments kept. 
As members of the Carnegie Mellon community, individuals are expected to uphold the 
standards of the community in addition to holding others accountable for said standards. It is rare 
that the life of a student in an academic community can be so private that it will not affect the 
community as a whole or that the above standards do not apply. 
The discovery, advancement and communication of knowledge are not possible without a 
commitment to these standards. Creativity cannot exist without acknowledgment of the creativity of 
others. New knowledge cannot be developed without credit for prior knowledge. Without the ability 
to trust that these principles will be observed, an academic community cannot exist. 
The commitment of its faculty, staff and students to these standards contributes to the high 
respect in which the Carnegie Mellon degree is held. Students must not destroy that respect by 
their failure to meet these standards. Students who cannot meet them should voluntarily withdraw 
from the university.1 
 
Expectations for this Class 
 
Assignments: Students are encouraged to talk to each other, to the T.A., to the instructor, or to 
anyone else about any of the homework assignments. Any assistance, though, must be limited to 
discussion of the problem and sketching general approaches to a solution. Each student must write 
out his or her own homework solutions. Consulting another student’s solution is prohibited, and 
submitted solutions may not be copied from any source. Copying from someone else’s homework 
(present, past years, past year’s solutions, etc.), lab write-up, or exam or allowing another student to 
copy his/her work, will be considered as cheating. Any form of collaboration is strictly prohibited on 
the exams and is considered cheating. If you collaborate with any other person on your assignment, 
list their name(s) at the top of the first page of your assignment. 
Cheating: If it appears answers have been shared between students, the instructor will contact 
these students to discuss the matter. If the instructor decides that the students have not prepared 
any of their answers individually, a grade of zero will be given for that assignment/exam for all 
students involved (both givers and takers of the shared information). If a student is involved in 
sharing answers a second time, the student will receive an R for the semester (failing grade).  
Plagiarism: References for any externally-sourced work (e.g. text, ideas or graphics) used in your 
answers should be referenced at the bottom of your assignment. This includes citations from the 
set paper. Failure to provide a reference for any externally-sourced work will result in a zero grade 
for that assignment. 
 
If you have any questions about these principles and how they apply in your specific 
situation: Just ask. We are happy to help you.  
1 From http://www.cmu.edu/policies/student-and-student-life/academic-integrity.html : “Instructors have a duty to 
communicate their expectations including those specific to collaboration, assistance, citation and acknowledgement 
within each course. Students likewise have a duty to ensure that they understand and abide by the standards that apply 
in any course or academic activity. In the absence of such understanding, it is the student’s responsibility to seek 
additional information and clarification.” [italics added] 
 
 
​
​
​
​
4