Overview
This course introduces students to the fundamentals of computer security, and is structured into
four broad sections: Software Security, Cryptography, System/Network Security, and Human Factors.
Recurring themes will be crisply defining security goals, assessing possible vulnerabilities that might
undermine those goals, and learning and how to identify, fix, and prevent such vulnerabilities.
Ultimately students will master the distinguishing feature of the security field, which is the
ubiquitous need to consider an adversary, and the resulting interplay between attack and defense
that routinely advances both theory and practice.
After completing the course, students will be able to:
Develop (formal and informal) threat models for modern systems.
Justify fundamental security principles and apply them to the analysis of novel situations.
Identify common security vulnerabilities, develop exploits against them, and assess the
tradeoffs of possible defenses.
Explain common techniques used to construct secure systems and evaluate their effectiveness
against a range of attacks.
Select the appropriate cryptographic primitive to achieve a desired security property, perform
basic cryptographic proofs, and evaluate the security of cryptographic protocols.
Argue for and against laws and public policy that intersect with computer security.
Incorporate human factors into the evaluation of the security of a system.
See the class schedule for a more detailed list of topics covered.
This course is the first step in both the SCS Security & Privacy concentration and the ECE Security &
Privacy concentration. These concentrations are designed to expose students to the key facets of
and concerns about computer security and privacy that drive practice, research, and legislation. On
completing the curriculum, students will be prepared to continue developing their interests in
security or privacy through graduate study; to be informed participants in public and other
processes that shape how organizations and society develop to meet new challenges related to
computer security or privacy; and to take jobs in security or privacy that will provide further training
in applicable areas.
Concretely, today there are approximately 500,000 cybersecurity-related job openings in the United
States [1] with a projected need for 1.8 million additional cybersecurity professionals by 2022 [2]. As
a specific example, U.S. News recently ranked information security analyst the fourth best
technology job with a median salary of $95,510.
15/18-330 Introduction to Computer Security, Fall 2024
 
 
SCHEDULE
ASSIGNMENTS
POLICY
8/24/24, 3:57 PM
Overview
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/
1/2

15/18-330 Introduction to
Computer Security, Fall 2024
Office Hours and Locations
See the Google Calendar for the latest info.
When: MWF 2:00PM-03:20PM, EDT
Where: DH 2210
Course Discussions on Ed
Course Canvas
Office Hours Queue
Who:
Professor Bryan Parno
Professor Riad Wahby
Head TA: Claire Chen
Teaching Assistants
1. Cheng Zhang
2. Cody Berger
3. Eleanor Li
4. Eric Wang
5. Owen Wu
6. Senam Anaglate
7. Zhengyao Lin
8/24/24, 3:57 PM
Overview
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/
2/2

Policies
Communication
We will be using Ed Discussions for discussions outside of class. Rather than emailing general
questions to a professor or TA, we encourage you to post your questions on Ed Discussions, so
everyone can benefit from the answer and any discussions around it.
Grading
For each exam (and only for the exams), we will curve the scores (upward only) to a normal
distribution.
We translate your final class percentage into a letter grade as follows:
89.5 – 100: A
79.5 – 89.4: B
69.5 – 79.4: C
59.5 – 69.4: D
< 59.5: F
The total points possible are allocated as follows:
40% Homework
20% Best exam score
20% Second best exam score
10% Third best exam score
5% Class Participation
5% Recitation Participation
Electronics
Studies show that multitasking with electronics in the classroom can have a significant negative
impact not just on your understanding, but also on the learning of students around you. Hence,
aside from the in-class polls discussed below, students may not use any electronic devices in lecture
(no cell phones, laptops, tables, etc.) without explicit permission in writing from the instructor.
Students are expected to take notes, but to do so manually (e.g., with pencil and paper). Exceptions
will be granted in accordance with university guidelines for accessibility concerns.
15/18-330 Introduction to Computer Security, Fall 2024
 
 
SCHEDULE
ASSIGNMENTS
POLICY
8/24/24, 3:57 PM
Policy
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/policy/
1/7

Participation
Attendance is required (if not always strictly recorded)
You will be responsible for all materials presented in lectures and recitations. You should not expect
that all lecture or recitation materials will be given to you in written form. We strongly encourage
you to be active in class discussions, in recitation, and Ed Discussions, but your actual participation
grades will be based on the quantitative measures described below. Note that these measures
include a grace policy designed to accomodate the inevitable conflicts that tend to arise each
semester. If you have to miss lecture or recitation, please do not ask to be excused; the missed
participation points will be automatically deducted from your grace budget.
Recording (audio or video)
Students may not independently record lectures or recitations without explicit permission in writing
from the instructor. Violations will result in your failing the course. Exceptions will be granted in
accordance with university guidelines for accessibility concerns, but even then such recordings may
not be shared publicly or privately and must be deleted at the end of the semester.
To facilitate additional learning that might come from revisiting a previous lecture, we aim to make
videos of the lectures privately available online via Canvas (look for the “Zoom” tab). The time taken
to transcode the videos can vary, so they may not be available immediately after the lecture slot.
These videos are only for students in the class and should not be shared. Finally, there are
sometimes glitches with the recording system so we do not guarantee that lecture videos will
always be posted.
Class Participation Score
Your class participation score will be based on the use of in-class polls. Most classes will begin with
1-2 questions about the previous lecture. These will be answered on your own. There will also be
questions during the lectures. For these, you will typically be allowed to confer with a partner before
answering. Overall, there will typically be 4-5 questions each class. To lower the pressure and to
account for inevitable conflicts or technical glitches that cause you to miss class, we will drop the
lowest 30% of your answers. In other words, if during the entire course, we have 100 questions,
then if you get credit for 70 of the questions, you will receive the full 5% participation score.
Recitation Participation Score
Most recitations will involve a group activity that you should be able to complete during recitation
(the goal is not to give you more homework!). If you complete the activity by the end of recitation,
you will receive 5 points. If by the end of recitation, you can show us that you made substantial
progress on the activity, then you will receive 4 points. Otherwise, you will receive 0 points. We will
drop the lowest 25% of your recitation activity scores.
Participation Ethics
8/24/24, 3:57 PM
Policy
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/policy/
2/7

Note that class and recitation participation points are meant to provide both you and me with
important feedback on how well you are learning the material. In this regard, they serve the same
purpose as homeworks or exams, just at a more frequent, lower-stakes level. Hence, just like on
homeworks and exams, conferring with others is not permitted (unless otherwise announced) nor
should you enter answers on others’ behalf. Violations will be handled in accordance with the
Cheating Policy below.
Optional Bonus Participation
One of the fun/scary parts of computer security is that security problems are constantly in the news!
One time during the semester, if you choose, you can add a post to Ed Discussions about such a
news item. The news must be recent (within the last 3 months), and it cannot be about news that
someone else has already posted about. In your post, succinctly and in your own words explain
how the news relates to the class, what the underlying security flaw was (i.e., don’t just say “TwitBook
got hacked”, say “An attacker exploited an XSS vulnerability in a library that TwitBook’s site relies on”),
and how it could have been prevented, ideally using techniques we have covered in class. Include
any relevant links to the news coverage, and ideally any underlying technical details (e.g., the
revelant entry in a CVE database). Plagiarizing in your post (e.g., by copying text from online news
sources without attribution) or using an AI assistant to write the summary for you will be treated as
an academic integrity issue. We reserve the right to ask you about the content of your post to
confirm that you have read and understood the material. Be sure to tag you post with the “News”
folder. A good news post will be worth 10 homework points, which will be added to your overall
homework score.
To spread these out during the semester, bonus credit will only be given for the first 10 news posts
in any given calendar week (i.e., Monday-Sunday), and only during the regular lecture portion of the
semester (i.e., not during finals period). Hence, we encourage you to post early on, so that you are
not shut out at the end of the semester.
Readings
Most lectures will be accompanied by optional and required readings. Optional readings provide
further depth and/or explanation which can be quite helpful for improving your understanding or
approaching certain homework questions, but the material in optional readings will not be required
for exams. Each class with a required reading will be accompanied by a “quiz” on Canvas. The “quiz”
will ask you to summarize the key points of the reading and report on any aspects you found
confusing. To ensure we can respond to such confusion during lecture, the “quiz” will be due a few
hours before the corresponding lecture. Late answers will not be accepted nor can late days be
used. Providing reasonable answers to both questions on the quiz will be worth 2 points. Scores
from quiz responses will be considered as part of your homework score. To account for the
vicissitudes of life, we will drop your two lowest reading scores.
Resources
8/24/24, 3:57 PM
Policy
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/policy/
3/7

Many of the lecture slides rely on PowerPoint animation to better convey the concepts. Hence,
when reviewing the slides at a later point, they work best if you actually click through the
presentation, instead of just looking at the slides statically. CMU provides you with a free,
downloadable copy of PowerPoint. If you run into trouble with that, you can also use PowerPoint in
a virtual machine, or via Virtual Andrew. You can also view them via a free online viewer or mobile
app.
Before each lecture, we provide you with a lecture guide (see the lecture schedule for links). These
include a variety of questions you should be able to answer by the end of the lecture. The notes are
not a substitute for attending lecture; they are merely intended to help you focus on important
topics that the lecture will cover. Note that material that does not appear in the lecture notes is still
fair game for homeworks and exams.
Late Days
Late days interfere with the ability of course staff to quickly turn around assignment grades and
solutions, since we cannot give out solutions or graded assignments until everyone has turned in
their work. However, we understand that unforseen circumstances may arise. Thus, each student
has a budget of three late days for the semester, of which at most one can be used on any
single assignment. Once your budget of late days has been used up, no further days will be
granted, and late homework will be marked as a zero.
The only exceptions will be for family emergencies and exceptional circumstances, such as
hospitalization and longer-term illness. To prevent misuse, requests for such exceptions will need to
be documented by emailing the professor and cc’ing your academic advisor. We do not offer
exceptions for personal scheduling issues such as interviews, class load, etc.
Ethics, and Cheating
The course staff will treat all students ethically and fairly. We, in turn, expect the same from all
students.
Any lapse in ethical behavior will immediately result in −1,000,000 points, as well as be immediately
reported to the appropriate university disciplinary unit. Really. No matter what. The course staff
looks at students who cheat or plagiarize as far beneath someone who fails the course.
This course will follow CMU’s policy on cheating and plagiarism. Note that the policy gives several
examples of what constitutes cheating and plagiarism. If you have any questions, you should contact
the instructors.
Students should behave ethically. This means obeying the law, but that is not enough. Behaving
ethically means you avoid activities that do harm or may do harm to people, the environment, or
other computers. In short, don’t be a nuisance.
8/24/24, 3:57 PM
Policy
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/policy/
4/7

Note just because you can do something (or you read about others doing it) does not make it ok.
For example, scanning a network may not be illegal (I am not a lawyer, so I shy away from definitive
statements). However, scanning can crash computers. For example, we know of several very popular
commodity-grade IP cameras that crash when you scan them. Sure, the camera software is buggy.
But is there any reason for you, not being a professional, to crash a camera monitoring a baby?
Launching exploits, “testing” the security of a system without explicit permission from all necessary
parties, and so on are all unethical for the purpose of this course.
Collaboration
Students are encouraged to talk to each other about class concepts. For assignments, assistance
should be limited to discussion of the problem and at most sketching general approaches. Each
student must turn in his or her own solution, derived from his or her own thoughts. Course staff
may verify a student did the prescribed work by asking for a verbal explanation, and failure to
correctly re-explain a submitted solution is considered a strong indication of cheating.
Student Outcomes
The ECE department is accredited by ABET to ensure the quality of your education. ABET defines 7
Educational Objectives that are fulfilled by the sum total of all the courses you take. The following list
describes which objectives are fulfilled by 18-330 and in what manner they are fulfilled. ABET
numbers objectives from 1 to 7. Those objectives not fulfilled by this course have been omitted
from the following list.
1. An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of
engineering, science, and mathematics. The course poses many problems (on homework, during
exams, and for in-class exercises) for students to formulate and solve using good engineering
practice. Students will use mathematical and engineering concepts to identify flaws in software
and solve the complex problems necessary to secure it.
2. An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with
consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, environmental,
and economic factors. Poor computer design and engineering are the root causes of most
security vulnerabilities in deployed systems today. As society increasingly relies on software in
critical situations, these vulnerabilities translate into threats to safety and economic well being.
This course will examine approaches, mechanisms, and tools used to make computer systems
more secure.
3. An ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences. Students practice their
communication skills during team-based exercises in class and recitation, as well as the basic
written communication of problem solutions on homework and exams.
4. An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make
informed judgments, which must consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic,
environmental, and societal contexts. As in many engineering domains, designing secure systems
involves extensive tradeoffs. Students will learn to assess and weigh these tradeoffs, including
the impact they have on end users.
8/24/24, 3:57 PM
Policy
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/policy/
5/7

5. An ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a
collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives. Students
will work in teams during exercises in lectures and recitations.
6. An ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies. In
multiple homework assignments, students must analyze new systems, identify vulnerabilities,
and develop custom exploits. This requires developing new knowledge, including use of the
tools to perform the analysis.
Work Life Balance
Take care of yourself. Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well,
exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will
help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to
ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Counseling and Psychological
Services (CaPS) is here to help: call 412-268-2922 and visit their website. Consider reaching out to a
friend, faculty or family member you trust for help getting connected to the support that can help.
If you have questions about this or your coursework, please let us know.
Commitment to Diversity
Every individual must be treated with respect. The ways we are diverse are many and are critical to
excellence and an inclusive community. They include but are not limited to: race, color, national
origin, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, creed, ancestry, belief, veteran
status, or genetic information. We at CMU, will work to promote diversity, equity and inclusion
because it is just and necessary for innovation. Therefore, while we are imperfect, we will work
inside and outside of our classrooms, to increase our commitment to build and sustain a
community that embraces these values.
It is the responsibility of each of us to create a safer and more inclusive environment. Bias incidents,
whether intentional or unintentional in their occurrence, contribute to creating an unwelcoming
environment for individuals and groups at the university. If you experience or observe unfair or
hostile treatment on the basis of identity, we encourage you to speak out for justice and support in
the moment and and/or share your experience anonymously using the following resources:
Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion: Email: csdi@andrew.cmu.edu, Phone: (412) 268-
2150
Report-It online anonymous reporting platform: Username: tartans, Password: plaid
8/24/24, 3:57 PM
Policy
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/policy/
6/7

15/18-330 Introduction to
Computer Security, Fall 2024
Office Hours and Locations
See the Google Calendar for the latest info.
All reports will be acknowledged, documented and a determination will be made regarding a course
of action. All experiences shared will be used to transform the campus climate.
8/24/24, 3:57 PM
Policy
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/policy/
7/7

Assignments
The assignments will give you hands-on experience in implementing the concepts we learn in the
class. Have fun!
Unless otherwise specified in Canvas, assignments are due by 11:59 PM EDT. However, staff
assistance (e.g., on Ed or via email) is only provided up to 10:00 PM EDT, so we encourage you to
complete your assignments early!
The dates below are estimates and subject to change. Canvas has definitive due dates.
Assignment 1: Security Principles and the Basics of Execution
Due: Sep 3, 2024
Estimated Duration: Short
Assignment 2: Exploits and Mitigations
Due: Sep 10, 2024
Estimated Duration: Short
Assignment 3: Exploits, ROP, and CFI
Due: Sep 17, 2024
Estimated Duration: Long
Assignment 4: Exploits, Verification, and Analysis
Due: Sep 26, 2024
Estimated Duration: Long
Assignment 5: Crypto Basics and PRFs
Due: Oct 10, 2024
Estimated Duration: Long
15/18-330 Introduction to Computer Security, Fall 2024
 
 
SCHEDULE
ASSIGNMENTS
POLICY
8/24/24, 3:58 PM
Assignments
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/assignments/
1/2

15/18-330 Introduction to
Computer Security, Fall 2024
Office Hours and Locations
See the Google Calendar for the latest info.
Assignment 6: Ciphers, MACs, Authenticated Encryption, and PKI
Due: Oct 24, 2024
Estimated Duration: Long
Assignment 7: Public Key and Blockchains
Due: Oct 31, 2024
Estimated Duration: Long
Assignment 8: Trusted Computing and Network Security
Due: Nov 12, 2024
Estimated Duration: Short
Assignment 9: PKI and the Web
Due: Nov 19, 2024
Estimated Duration: Medium
Assignment 10: Web, Privacy, Usability
Due: Nov 26, 2024
Estimated Duration: Long
8/24/24, 3:58 PM
Assignments
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/assignments/
2/2

Schedule
(Note this is a rough schedule and things are subject to change.)
Aug 26, 2024 Security Principles: 1. Introduction, Ethics, and Course Overview (Instructor: Parno &
Wahby)  |  [Guide]
This lecture will give a high-level overview of the course, including topics covered, learning goals, and
course mechanics. We will also discuss ethical challenges associated with computer security.
Optional Reading:
On Trusting Trust
Aug 28, 2024 Security Principles: 2. Threat Models, Trusted Computing Bases, and Design
Principles (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]
This lecture will present techniques to reason systematically about an attacker's capabilities and a
system's security dependencies. We will also introduce some fundamental principles of secure
system design that will be recurring themes throughout the course.
Reading:
Computer Security and the Internet, Ch. 1 (up to and including 1.8)
Optional Reading:
Threat Modeling, Chapter 1
Protection of Information (Section I.A, pages 4-6, starting at "3) Design Principles")
Aug 30, 2024 Software Security: 3. Execution Semantics (Instructor: Wahby)  |  [Guide]
Attackers often exploit the conventions of normal program execution. To understand such exploits,
we first must understand the normal conventions. This recitaiton will review the material up through
Chapter 3 of CS:APP from 15-213. Consider reviewing the course notes linked below as well. We will
cover the parts of the compilation tool chain and operations at the assembly level, including control
flow, the memory model, and stack frames.
Optional Reading:
Chapter 3 of Computer Systems A Programmers Perspective Volume 2
15-213 Course Schedule (review the "Machine Prog" lectures )
Sep 2, 2024 : No Class
University holiday: Labor day. Enjoy the day off!
15/18-330 Introduction to Computer Security, Fall 2024
 
 
SCHEDULE
ASSIGNMENTS
POLICY
8/24/24, 3:58 PM
Schedule
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/schedule/
1/8

Sep 4, 2024 Software Security: 4. Control-Flow Attacks (Instructor: Wahby)  |  [Guide]  |  [Notes]
In this lecture, we explore control-flow-hijacking attacks that gain control of the instruction pointer.
We will review buffer overflows that you should have seen in previous classes, as well as introducing
new attacks, such as format-string exploits.
Optional Reading:
Smashing the Stack for Fun and Profit
Smashing the Stack in 2011
Exploiting Format String Vulnerabilities
Sep 6, 2024 Software Security: Recitation: Thinking Up Exploits - Part 1 (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
We will practice the skills needed to analyze an unknown binary, identify vulnerabilities, and exploit
them.
Sep 9, 2024 Software Security: 5. Deployed Mitigations and Return Oriented Programming
Attacks (Instructor: Wahby)  |  [Guide]  |  [Notes]
We will introduce control-flow hijack defenses found in practice today, including canaries, DEP, and
randomization (ASLR). We will also discuss methods for bypassing these defenses. Finally, we review
Return Oriented Programming attacks.
Reading:
Sections 1 and 3.1-3.2.4 of The Geometry of Innocent Flesh on the Bone Return-into-libc
without Calls (on the x86)
Optional Reading:
Return-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages, and Applications
Q Exploit Hardening Made Easy
ropasaurusrex a primer on return-oriented
Design of ASLR in PAX
ASLR Smack and Laugh Reference
Effectiveness of ASLR
Sep 11, 2024 Software Security: 6. Defenses: CFI and Type Safety (Instructor: Wahby)  |  [Guide]
This lecture will cover techniques to retrofit memory safety on legacy C code, with a focus on
Control Flow Integrity (CFI). CFI is a security property that specifies real executions should follow the
static CFG. We will explore CFI, focusing on what "the" CFG is. We will also introduce programming
language techniques based on type safety that can eliminate entire classes of bugs.
Reading:
Sections 1-3 of Control Flow Integrity Principles, Implementations, and Applications
Optional Reading:
CCured: Type-Safe Retrofitting of Legacy Software (Sections 4-6 are optional)
8/24/24, 3:58 PM
Schedule
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/schedule/
2/8

Sep 13, 2024 Software Security: Recitation: Thinking Up Exploits - Part 2 (Instructor: Parno &
Wahby)
We will continue to practice the skills needed to analyze an unknown binary, identify vulnerabilities,
and exploit them.
Sep 16, 2024 Software Security: 7. Type Systems and Verification (Instructor: Wahby)  |  [Guide]
We will cover programming language techniques that provably eliminate entire classes of
vulnerabilities and even prove strong properties about software.
Reading:
Program Proofs (Ch 2 -- we will focus on weakest preconditions, so you can ignore the definition
and computation of strong postconditions, Ch 13)
Sep 18, 2024 Software Security: 8. Verification and Dafny (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]
We will continue to cover principles of verifying software, and we will introduce Dafny, a program
verification language (https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny).
Reading:
Getting Started with Dafny - A Guide (Skip 6,10,11)
Sep 20, 2024 Software Security: Recitation: Provably Correct Software (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
We will practice using the Dafny program verification language (https://github.com/dafny-
lang/dafny).
Sep 23, 2024 Software Security: 9. Code Analysis and Isolation Techniques (Instructor: Wahby)  | 
[Guide]
This lecture will cover techniques to analyze code for memory vulnerabilities. To mitigate
vulnerabilities we cannot or do not find, we will cover various system mechanisms for achieving
isolation: sandboxing, Software Fault Isolation (SFI), program partitioning, and airgaps.
Reading:
Computer Security and the Internet, Ch. 5 (section 5.1)
Optional Reading:
A Few Billion Lines Of Code Later: Using Static Analysis To Find Bugs In The Real World
Software Fault Isolation
Native Client
Sep 25, 2024 Crypto: 10. Introduction to Cryptography (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]  |  [Notes]
In this lecture we will provide a high-level introduction to cryptography, including an overview of
primitives and security models. We will touch on the rich power offered by modern cryptographic
tools. Finally, we will discuss (in)secure sources of randomness.
Reading:
8/24/24, 3:58 PM
Schedule
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/schedule/
3/8

A Graduate Course in Applied Cryptography (Ch. 2.1, 2.2, and 3.10)
Optional Reading:
Coursera Course on Cryptography
Handbook of Applied Cryptography Chapter 1
Sep 27, 2024 Review: Software & Systems Security (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
This slot will be a review period. We will provide approximately a 30 minute review, and then will
open up the floor for questions. Please think ahead of time what would be good questions; we are
happy to answer anything. If there are no questions, it will be a short meeting.
Sep 30, 2024 Crypto: 11. (Pseudo)Randomness (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]  |  [Notes]
We will cover the principles of pseudorandom functions, permutations, and introduce the notion of
adversarial games to prove security properties of cryptographic constructions.
Reading:
A Graduate Course in Applied Cryptography (Ch. 4.4.1)
Oct 2, 2024 Exam: Security Principles and Software Security (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
We will have the first exam of the course. It will cover all information covered to date up to but not
including cryptography. This will be a closed book, closed notes, closed neighbor exam.
Oct 4, 2024 Crypto: Recitation: Proofs by Reduction (Instructor: Parno)
We will discuss strategies for deciding if something is secure/insecure and for how to write a proof
of security. Students will work in teams on practice problems.
Oct 7, 2024 Crypto: 12. Secrecy and Symmetric Key Ciphers (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]  | 
[Notes]
We will cover definitions of computations secrecy and block ciphers.
Reading:
A Graduate Course in Applied Cryptography (Ch. 2.3.1, 2.3.5 (skipping Theorem 2.10 and
2.3.5.1), Definitions and examples of negligible functions in 2.4.1)
Oct 9, 2024 Crypto: 13. Cipher Modes and Hashes (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]
We will cover block cipher modes and cryptographic hash functions.
Reading:
A Graduate Course in Applied Cryptography (Ch. 4.4.4.1, 5.1, 5.3, 5.5 up to but not including
Attack Game 5.3 on page 199, 8.1 (except 8.1.1), 8.3)
Oct 11, 2024 Crypto: 14. Integrity and MACs (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]  |  [Notes]
This lecture will look at the property of integrity and how to achieve it using a Message
8/24/24, 3:58 PM
Schedule
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/schedule/
4/8

Authentication Code (MAC). We will also cover basics of authenticated encryption, which is a
commonly used operation.
Reading:
A Graduate Course in Applied Cryptography (Ch. 6.1 (except 6.1.1),6.3, Intro to Ch.9 and
9.1(skipping 9.1.1.), 9.4.3)
Optional Reading:
Message Authentication using Hash Functions: The HMAC Construction
The Order of Encryption and Authentication for Protecting Communications (Or: How Secure is
SSL?)
Oct 14, 2024 : No Class
Fall break!
Oct 16, 2024 : No Class
Fall break!
Oct 18, 2024 : No Recitation
Fall break!
Oct 21, 2024 Crypto: 15. Public Key Cryptography (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]  |  [Notes]
In this lecture we will cover the fundamentals of public key cryptography, focusing on RSA and Diffie-
Hellman as examples.
Reading:
A Graduate Course in Applied Cryptography (Ch. 10.1-10.5 (skip subsections on "Mathematical
details" and 10.5.1), 11.1, 11.2 (skip 11.2.1), 13 intro and 13.1 (except 13.1.2))
Optional Reading:
Remote Timing Attacks are Practical
Oct 23, 2024 Crypto: 16. Blockchains and Cryptocurrencies (Instructor: Wahby)  |  [Guide]
We will cover the basics of blockchains (what they are, what they are and are not good for),
cryptocurrencies and, time permitting, smart contracts
Reading:
Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies (Pages 3-21)
Optional Reading:
Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies (Chapters 1-2)
Oct 25, 2024 Crypto: Recitation: Cryptocurrencies (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
We will spend some virtual cash and write some smart contracts
8/24/24, 3:58 PM
Schedule
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/schedule/
5/8

Oct 28, 2024 Systems Security: 17. Trusted Computing (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]
This lecture will cover techniques for bootstrapping trust in systems.
Reading:
Sections 2,3,and 4.2.2 of Bootstrapping Trust in Commodity Computers
Oct 30, 2024 Network Security: 18. Introduction to Network Security (Instructor: Wahby)  |  [Guide]
This lecture will give a broad overview of network security, including general principles, denial-of-
service attacks, and intrusion detection (and prevention) systems. The latter will cover some basic
detection theory, focusing on the base rate fallacy.
Reading:
Computer Security and the Internet, Ch. 10 (section 10.1) (10.6 is optional but possibly useful)
Computer Security and the Internet, Ch. 11 (sections 11.1-11.2, 11.4)
Optional Reading:
The Base Rate Fallacy and its implications for the difficulty of intrusion detection
Security Problems in the TCP/IP Suite
A Look Back Security Problems in the TCP/IP Suite
Nov 1, 2024 Review: Crypto (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
This will be a review session for all lectures on cryptography. Please think ahead of time what
questions you may have.
Nov 4, 2024 Systems Security: 19. AI and Security (Instructor: Wahby)
This lecture will talk about some of the applications of AI in security. We will also cover attacks
against AI (and in particular machine learning) in security.
Reading:
Sections 1 and 3 of Security and Privacy in Machine Learning
Nov 6, 2024 Exam: Crypto (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
We will have the second exam of the course. It will cover all information covered to date, but it will
focus on Crypto. This will be a closed book, closed note, closed neighbor exam.
Nov 8, 2024 System Security: Recitation: AI Hacking (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
In this recitation you will experiment hands-on with attacks against ML classifiers.
Nov 11, 2024 Systems Security: 20. Authorization and Access Control (Instructor: Wahby)  |  [Guide]
This lecture will introduce the three "AU"’s; authentication, authorization, and audit. We will cover
topics including classic and modern approaches to access control.
Reading:
Computer Security and the Internet, Ch. 5 (sections 5.2,5.7)
8/24/24, 3:58 PM
Schedule
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/schedule/
6/8

A Graduate Course in Applied Cryptography (Ch. 13.8)
Optional Reading:
Protection of Information (Sections I.B and II)
Computer Security in the Real World
Nov 13, 2024 Web Security: 21. Attacks (Instructor: Wahby)  |  [Guide]
This lecture will cover web security, including vulnerabilities such as injection attacks, XSS, and CSRF.
Reading:
Computer Security and the Internet, Ch. 9 (Portions on HTTP proxies, as well as 9.8 onwards,
are optional)
Optional Reading:
Mozilla tutorials on web technology
Cross Site Scripting Explained
Robust Defenses for Cross-Site Request Forgery
Nov 15, 2024 Web Security: Recitation: Web Hacking (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
Nov 18, 2024 Web Security: 22. Defenses (Instructor: Wahby)  |  [Guide]
This lecture will cover web security with a focus on principles, such as authentication vs.
authorization, and best practices for establishing security on the web.
Optional Reading:
Native Client: A Sandbox for Portable, Untrusted x86 Native Code
Beware of Finer-Grained Origins
Nov 20, 2024 Human Factors: 23. Privacy (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]
This lecture will cover general concepts and various mathematical definitions of privacy as well as
how to achive them.
Reading:
Pages 1-7 of A Firm Foundation for Private Data Analysis
Optional Reading:
Engineering Privacy
Nov 22, 2024 Research: Recitation: State-of-the-Art Security Research (Instructor: Wahby)
Nov 25, 2024 Human Factors: 24. Making Security Usable (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]
The most secure system in the world can be subverted if users can't employ it correctly (or if they
themselves are subverted!). This lecture will cover usable design, with case studies drawn from
security warnings, authentication, and phishing. We will also cover attacks and defenses based on
social engineering.
8/24/24, 3:58 PM
Schedule
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/schedule/
7/8

15/18-330 Introduction to
Computer Security, Fall 2024
Office Hours and Locations
See the Google Calendar for the latest info.
Reading:
Pages 1-14 of "Why Johnny Can’t Encrypt A Usability Evaluation of PGP 5.0"
Optional Reading:
A Framework for Reasoning About the Human in the Loop
Crying Wolf: An Empirical Study of SSL Warning Effectiveness
The Quest to Replace Passwords: A Framework for Comparative Evaluation of Web
Authentication Schemes
Nov 27, 2024 : No Class
Thanksgiving! Enjoy the break!
Nov 29, 2024 : No Recitation
Thanksgiving! Enjoy the break!
Dec 2, 2024 Human Factors: 25. Law and Public Policy (Instructor: Parno)  |  [Guide]
This lecture will cover legal frameworks and policies that govern security and privacy in practice.
Reading:
Executive Summary and Section 1 of Keys Under Doormats: Mandating Insecurity by Requiring
Government Access to All Data and Communications
Dec 4, 2024 Review: Systems (OS, Web, Network), and Human Factors (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
We will have about a 30 minute review of all material in the third part of this class. The rest of the
time will be devoted to questions and answers, so make sure you bring good questions.
Dec 6, 2024 Exam: Network, Web, and Human Factors (Instructor: Parno & Wahby)
This will be our third and final exam. Like previous exams it will be closed book, closed notes, closed
neighbor. The exam will focus on the last third of the course, but any material over the entire
semester is game.
8/24/24, 3:58 PM
Schedule
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/course/18-330/2024f/schedule/
8/8