Carnegie Mellon University 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
18-372  
    
 
 
 
                                                    Fall 2024 
Fundamentals of Electric Power Systems 
Course Syllabus 
 
Instructor 
 
Tom Sullivan  
tms@ece.cmu.edu 
Office:  HH A-209 
 
 
 
Office hours:  
Tuesday  12:30 -1:30 pm in HH A-209 (right after class) 
 
Teaching Assistant 
 
Hariharan Chithalamangalam Saravanan   
hchithal@andrew.cmu.edu 
 
 
 
 
Course Web Page 
 
We will use the Canvas course system for our class web page. Information about the staff’s office hours 
and location for those hours will be available in the Syllabus section of the web page.  Homework 
assignments will be posted to Canvas as well as homework solutions.  Your grades are also available in 
Canvas.  We encourage you to check your scores regularly and bring to our attention any discrepancies 
between what grades you received written on your work and what is listed on Canvas.  Students are also 
responsible for any information conveyed to the class via Canvas announcements. 
 

 
 
Course Description 
 
The goal of this course is to introduce students to the basics of the electrical power grid and power 
generation, transmission, consumption and types of power generation. The power grid of the United 
States was named the greatest engineering achievement of the 20th century by the National Academy of 
Engineering and described by former Department of Energy Secretary Moniz as “a continent-spanning 
machine of immense complexity that is at its best when it’s invisible.” The ongoing reinvention of the 
grid from a 19th century design to a modern, more agile and efficient system is one of the greatest and 
most interesting challenges in engineering. This class will look at the grid from many perspectives, not 
just as a collection of electric circuits but as a system of systems, with mechanical, political, economic, 
social, environmental and other aspects in constant interplay. 
 
 
A Reference Textbook 
 
Power Systems: Analysis and Design, 3rd edition, by J. Duncan Glover and Mulukutla S. Sarma, 
Brooks/Cole, 2002 
 
Suggested Reading:  
 
How the Electricity Grid Works | Union of Concerned Scientists (ucsusa.org)  
Link:   https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/how-electricity-grid-works 
 
Slides 
 
There will be a mixture of previous lecture slides and written on slides for 18-372.  We prefer to be 
flexible with the course material as it is presented, allowing the lectures to react easily to student 
questions.  What we’ve done in class will be uploaded to Canvas after each class for you to review 
 

 
 
Course schedule: 
 
Lectures: 
 
Tuesday and Thursday, 11:00 am – 12:20 pm, WeH 8427 
 
We will not be recording the lectures or recitations.  It will be important to be present in class to ask 
questions and to participate in the dialog that takes place during lecture. 
 
Recitations:  
 
Friday, 12:00 pm – 12:50 pm, WeH 8427      
 
Since this is a small class, the recitation section is basically a group “office hour” for the TA to answer 
your questions and for you all to further discuss the course material. 
 
Handouts: 
 
All course materials will be available via Canvas and Homework and Exams via Gradescope.  
 
Homework: 
 
There will be problem sets distributed on Canvas/Gradescope periodically throughout the semester.  You 
will have at least one week to complete each assignment from when it is posted and hand-in will be 
through Gradescope.  Assignments will be graded for “effort”.  While discussing HW with your 
classmates is allowed, you must do your own work where the mechanics of solving the problems are 
concerned or answering essay/thought questions.  No group HW turn-in.   
 
Research Paper and Presentation: 
 
All students will choose some topic in Energy on which to do some research and write a summary paper.  
Everyone will do a very short presentation of their topic in class on the last week of class after 
Thanksgiving (mandatory attendance, so please plan accordingly).   
 
Abstract Due.  Thursday, October 31 by end of class, 12:30 pm 
Presentations:  Tuesday and Thursday December 3 and 5 
Paper Due:  
Wednesday December 11 (Reading Day) by 4 pm. 
 
Exams: 
 
Two term exams will be given on the following dates: 
 
Thursday, October 10 (week 7) 
Tuesday, November 26 (week 13) (Note:  This is the Tuesday before Thanksgiving.  You can be remote 
for the exam as it is a take-home, more on this later, this exam will be comprehensive). 
 
There will be no Final Exam for this course during the final exam week.  Your final paper will be due on 
Reading Day, Wed. Dec. 11  
 

 
 
 
Exam Taking Policy(s) 
 
All exams are to be taken during the scheduled exam date and time.  There are no make-ups.  If there is 
a dire emergency preventing you from taking an exam at the scheduled time (and I mean dire), you must 
meet with the instructor within one week of the originally scheduled exam time to discuss how to make 
up the credit for that exam, else you will receive a zero for that exam.  Make-ups will be given at the 
convenience and discretion of the instructor and will generally be more difficult than the originally 
scheduled exam.  The format of the make-up work is up to the instructor.   
 
If you have special circumstances approved by the Disabled Student Services office, it is up to you to 
make arrangements with the instructor at least 72 hours before the scheduled exam time.  Failure to do 
so will result in you taking the exam in the same place and at the same time (and for the same length of 
time) as the rest of the class. 
 
Grading: 
 
Your final grade will be calculated using the following method: 
 
20%  Homework (lowest score dropped) 
20% 
Paper and presentation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60%  Two term exams 
 
While lower cutoffs may be used, the following cutoffs are guaranteed: 
 
>90% A 
>80% B 
>70% C 
>60% D 
 
Re-grades 
 
Re-grades on any course materials will only be given if a serious mistake in the grading has taken place.  
The course instructor is the only person to be approached for a re-grade of any course material.  No 
material will be accepted for a re-grade more than one week after it has been available for viewing by 
the student.  If materials are submitted for a re-grade, the entire piece of work is subject to re-grade, not 
just the portion the student wishes.  Regrades are requested through Gradescope.  
 
Cheating: 
 
Any student caught cheating in this course will receive an R and the facts of the case and the penalty will 
be reported to the Dean of Student Affairs.  While students may work in groups to discuss homework 
assignments, copying from someone else’s homework (present or past years or past year’s solutions), lab 
write-up, or exam or allowing another student to copy his/her work, will be considered as cheating.