1 
 
Carnegie Mellon University Africa 
18-759 RW: Wireless Communications and Mobile Networks 
Course Syllabus 
(Spring 2025 | January 13, 2025) 
INSTRUCTOR 
Edwin Mugume 
 
emugume@andrew.cmu.edu 
Phone:   
 
 
+250 (0)783 834436 / +256 (0)784 031622 [WhatsApp] 
Class Time:  
 
TT 08:00-09:50 CAT 
Office Hours:   
 
MW 12:00-14:00 CAT (Or on appointment) 
Recitation Class: 
 
F 12:00-12:50 CAT (Led by TA and Students) 
 
Classroom:  
 
Room F305 DLR 
 
TEACHING ASSISTANT: 
Ayisha Nuhu:  
 
anuhu@andrew.cmu.edu   
Office Hours:                
By Appointment 
 
COURSE WEB PAGE: 
We will mainly use Canvas and Piazza. You are encouraged to be active on Piazza. 
 
TEXTBOOKS: 
Cory Beard and William Stallings, Wireless Communication Networks and Systems, First 
Edition, Pearson, 2016.  
Theodore S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications – Principles and Practice, Second Edition, 
Prentice Hall, 2012. 
Roger L. Freeman, Radio System Design for Telecommunications, Third Edition, Wiley, 2007.  
 
Additional references and materials will be uploaded to Canvas if and when necessary. 
 
COURSE DESCRIPTION: 
This course introduces fundamental concepts of wireless networks and systems. These 
fundamentals aim to help a student understand any type of wireless network application or 
technology. It covers the theory of wireless propagation and the associated path loss 
phenomena. The course focuses on understanding the effects of the channel on signal 
propagation for broadcast and line-of-sight wireless systems. It covers mobile cellular networks 
and satellite systems in detail. The course explains recent advances in wireless technologies in 
the context of recent trends, for instance the technologies that are applied in 5G networks. 
Students will appreciate recent directions such as mmWave propagation, UAV-based cellular 
networks, distributed antenna systems, etc. Students will be assessed through labs, 
homeworks, quizzes, a mid-term exam, and a final group project. 
 
COURSE OBJECTIVES: 
The objectives of this course are as follows: 
• Appreciate the principles of wireless communication technologies and mobile cellular 
networks. 
• Understand the wireless channel and its effects on any wireless network technology.  
• Understand wireless link and network planning and optimization techniques and the 
factors that affect them. 

2 
 
• Apply industry-grade tools to (a) plan a mobile cellular network over a given service 
area; (b) plan a line-of-sight link between two points; and (c) plan a point-to-multipoint 
microwave-based network. 
• Understand the wireless operational principles of satellite communications.  
• Understand recent advances in wireless and mobile networks such as 5G technology, 
UAV-based cellular technology, distributed antenna systems, etc. 
• Understand industry and research trends in wireless communications, with particular 
emphasis on mobile network technologies. 
 
LEARNING OUTCOMES: 
By the end of this course, you should be able to: 
• Explain how the wireless channel and associated multipath fading affects signal 
propagation in a wireless network. 
• Explain the difference between large-scale and small-scale propagation models. 
• Design long-distance terrestrial line-of-sight links, considering rain fading and 
atmospheric absorption as well as the effect of the earth’s curvature. 
• Explain the different techniques that are used to mitigate wireless channel effects.  
• Understand the design process of cellular networks and appreciate the factors that 
influence their deployment strategies.   
• Understand how satellites work and the factors that influence their deployment, 
including the global positioning system (GPS). 
• Appreciate recent advances in wireless and mobile networks such as UAV-based 
systems, 5G technology, etc. 
 
GRADING: 
Homeworks:  
 
 
 
 
10% 
Quizzes: 
 
 
 
 
 
5% 
Paper Summary: 
 
 
 
 
5% 
  
Class Labs:  
 
 
 
 
25% 
Final Project:  
 
 
 
 
30% 
Mid-term Exam: 
 
 
 
 
25% 
 
There will be several labs, some of which may be group-based. The final project is group-based 
and involves designing some communication networks. It will integrate what you have learned 
in labs, assignments, and lectures.  
 
COURSE OUTLINE: 
The course will mainly cover the following areas: 
• Overview of wireless systems and mobile networks. 
• Radio wave propagation: Line-of-sight and non-line-of-sight propagation, path loss 
modeling, fading and multipath effects, rain effects and atmospheric absorption. 
• Mitigation techniques of wireless channel effects.  
• Mobile cellular network: System design and deployment strategies. 
• Multiple access and multi-user communications.  
• Satellite systems, including the GPS system. 
• Current advances in wireless networking  
• Technologies for 5G and Beyond-5G networks. 
 

3 
 
CLASS POLICIES: 
A. Missing Classes 
You are expected to attend every class. Each missed class without a valid reason will be 
penalized by deducting 2% from your final mark. If you are unable to attend a class, write to the 
instructor (with the TA in copy), preferably before the class. I will provide a Zoom option if you 
have a valid reason and can attend online. All communication must be in English. When in class, 
pay attention and avoid any distractions. Switch off your phones and avoid using your laptop 
unless it is necessary to do so.  
 
B. Class Labs and Assignments 
Labs will be done individually unless otherwise stated. Students are encouraged to talk to each 
other, to the TA, or to the instructor about any of the assignments, including labs. Any 
assistance, though, must be limited to discussion of the problem and sketching general 
approaches to a solution. Each student must write out his or her own solutions (including codes 
where applicable) and prepare an individual report. Consulting another student’s solution is 
prohibited and submitted solutions may not be copied from any source. For hardware-based 
labs, be flexible to share the available hardware. Submit lab reports and other assignments on 
time or seek permission if you cannot meet the deadline. Long delays will be penalized. 
 
C.